BIOLOGY A LEVEL COURSE BOOK 5TH EDITION — SOURCE AUDIT INDEX

Title:           Untitled
Creator:         Adobe InDesign 14.0 (Macintosh)
Producer:        GPL Ghostscript 9.22
CreationDate:    Tue Jun 23 02:22:09 2020 UTC
ModDate:         Sun Sep 17 10:20:22 2023 UTC
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           658
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       620.787 x 782.36 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       50316784 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.5

=== FRONT MATTER / CONTENTS (PDF pages 1-30) ===

--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Biology
 for Cambridge International AS & A Level
 COURSEBOOK

 Mary Jones, Richard Fosbery, Dennis Taylor & Jennifer Gregory




Fifth edition Digital Access



 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
i
 rs




Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Biology
for Cambridge International AS & A Level
 COURSEBOOK

 Mary Jones, Richard Fosbery, Dennis Taylor & Jennifer Gregory




 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
79 Anson Road, #06–04/06, Singapore 079906

Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of education,
learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.

www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108859028
© Cambridge University Press 2020
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First edition 2003
Second edition 2007
Third edition 2012
Fourth edition 2014
Fifth edition 2020
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in Dubai by Oriental Press
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-108-85902-8 Coursebook Paperback with Digital Access (2 Years)
ISBN 978-1-108-79651-4 Digital Coursebook (2 Years)
ISBN 978-1-108-79653-8 Coursebook eBook
Additional resources for this publication at www.cambridge.org/9781108859028
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel timetables, and other
factual information given in this work is correct at the time of first printing but
Cambridge University Press does not guarantee the accuracy of such information
thereafter.


NOTICE TO TEACHERS IN THE UK
It is illegal to reproduce any part of this work in material form (including
photocopying and electronic storage) except under the following circumstances:
(i) where you are abiding by a licence granted to your school or institution by the
 Copyright Licensing Agency;
(ii) where no such licence exists, or where you wish to exceed the terms of a licence,
 and you have gained the written permission of Cambridge University Press;
(iii) where you are allowed to reproduce without permission under the provisions
 of Chapter 3 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, which covers, for
 example, the reproduction of short passages within certain types of educational
 anthology and reproduction for the purposes of setting examination questions.


NOTICE TO TEACHERS
Cambridge International copyright material in this publication is reproduced under licence
and remains the intellectual property of Cambridge Assessment International Education.
 W
Cambridge Assessment International Education bears no responsibility for the example
answers to questions taken from its past question papers which are contained in this
publication.

Exam-style questions and sample answers have been written by the authors.
In examinations, the way marks are awarded may be different. References to
assessment and/or assessment preparation are the publisher’s interpretation of the
syllabus requirements and may not fully reflect the approach of Cambridge Assessment
International Education.

Cambridge International recommends that teachers consider using a range of teaching and
learning resources in preparing learners for assessment, based on their own professional
judgement of their students’ needs.




 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Teachers play an important part in shaping futures.
 Our Dedicated Teacher Awards recognise the hard
 work that teachers put in every day.
Thank you to everyone who nominated this year; we have been inspired and moved
 by all of your stories. Well done to all our nominees for your dedication to learning
 and for inspiring the next generation of thinkers, leaders and innovators.




WINNER
 WINNER
 Ahmed Saya Sharon Kong Foong Abhinandan Bhattacharya Anthony Chelliah Candice Green Jimrey Buntas Dapin
Cordoba School for A-Level, Sunway College, JBCN International School Oshiwara, Gateway College, St Augustine’s College, University of San Jose-Recoletos,
 Pakistan Malaysia India Sri Lanka Australia Philippines




 For more information about our dedicated teachers and their stories, go to
 dedicatedteacher.cambridge.org




 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK




 Contents
Introduction vii 4 Cell membranes and transport
 4.1 The importance of membranes 98
How to use this series ix
 4.2 Structure of membranes 98
How to use this book xi 4.3 Roles of the molecules found in
 membranes 101
1 Cell structure 4.4 Cell signalling 102
 1.1 Cells are the basic units of life 3 4.5 Movement of substances across
 1.2 Cell biology and microscopy 4 membranes 104
 1.3 Plant and animal cells as seen with
 a light microscope 4 5 The mitotic cell cycle
 1.4 Measuring size and calculating 5.1 Growth and reproduction 124
 magnification 11 5.2 Chromosomes 125
 1.5 Electron microscopy 14 5.3 The cell cycle 126
 1.6 Plant and animal cells as seen with an 5.4 Mitosis 127
 electron microscope 17 5.5 The role of telomeres 132
 1.7 Bacteria 32 5.6 The role of stem cells 133
 1.8 Comparing prokaryotic cells with 5.7 Cancers 134
 eukaryotic cells 34
 1.9 Viruses 34 6 Nucleic acids and protein synthesis
 6.1 The molecule of life 144
2 Biological molecules
 6.2 The structure of DNA and RNA 144
 2.1 Biochemistry 45
 6.3 DNA replication 149
 2.2 The building blocks of life 45
 6.4 The genetic code 150
 2.3 Monomers, polymers and
 macromolecules 45 6.5 Protein synthesis 151
 2.4 Carbohydrates 46 6.6 Gene mutations 153
 2.5 Lipids 53 7 Transport in plants
 2.6 Proteins 57
 7.1 The transport needs of plants 163
 2.7 Water 66
 7.2 Vascular system: xylem and phloem 163
3 Enzymes 7.3 Structure of stems, roots and leaves and
 the distribution of xylem and phloem 164
 3.1 What is an enzyme? 75
 7.4 The transport of water 170
 3.2 Mode of action of enzymes 76
 7.5 Transport of assimilates 180
 3.3 Investigating the progress of an
 enzyme-catalysed reaction 79 8 Transport in mammals
 3.4 Factors that affect enzyme action 81
 8.1 Transport systems in animals 194
 3.5 Comparing enzyme affinities 84
 8.2 The mammalian circulatory system 194
 3.6 Enzyme inhibitors 85
 8.3 Blood vessels 195
 3.7 Immobilising enzymes 87




iv

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
Contents


 8.4 Tissue fluid 200 13 Photosynthesis
 8.5 Blood 202 13.1 An energy transfer process 332
 8.6 The heart 209 13.2 Structure and function of chloroplasts 333
 13.3 The light-dependent stage of
9 Gas exchange
 photosynthesis 337
 9.1 Gas exchange 224
 13.4 The light-independent stage of
 9.2 Lungs 225 photosynthesis 339
 9.3 Trachea, bronchi and bronchioles 226 13.5 Limiting factors in photosynthesis 340
 9.4 Warming and cleaning the air 226
 9.5 Alveoli 228 14 Homeostasis
 14.1 Homeostasis 349
10 Infectious disease 14.2 The structure of the kidney 352
 10.1 Infectious diseases 238 14.3 Control of water content 360
 10.2 Antibiotics 253 14.4 The control of blood glucose 364
 14.5 Homeostasis in plants 371
11 Immunity
 11.1 Defence against disease 267 15 Control and coordination
 11.2 Cells of the immune system 268 15.1 Hormonal communication 388
 11.3 Active and passive immunity 277 15.2 Nervous communication 389
 15.3 Muscle contraction 406
P1 Practical skills for AS Level
 15.4 Control and coordination in plants 413
 P1.1 Practical skills 292
 P1.2 Experiments 292 16 Inheritance
 P1.3 Variables and making measurements 292 16.1 Gametes and reproduction 428
 P1.4 Recording quantitative results 298 16.2 The production of genetic variation 433
 P1.5 Displaying data 299 16.3 Genetics 435
 P1.6 Making conclusions 301 16.4 Monohybrid inheritance and genetic
 P1.7 Describing data 301 diagrams 437
 P1.8 Making calculations from data 301 16.5 Dihybrid inheritance 441
 P1.9 Identifying sources of error and 16.6 The chi-squared (χ2) test 449
 suggesting improvements 303 16.7 Genes, proteins and phenotype 451
 P1.10 Drawings 304 16.8 Control of gene expression 453

12 Energy and respiration 17 Selection and evolution
 12.1 The need for energy in living organisms 312 17.1 Variation 465
 12.2 Aerobic respiration 313 17.2 Natural selection 469
 12.3 Mitochondrial structure and function 319 17.3 Genetic drift and the founder effect 474
 12.4 Respiration without oxygen 320 17.4 The Hardy–Weinberg principle 476
 12.5 Respiratory substrates 322 17.5 Artificial selection 478
 17.6 Evolution 482
 17.7 Identifying evolutionary relationships 486




 v

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK



18 Classification, biodiversity and P2 Practical skills for A Level
 conservation P2.1 Practical skills 582
 18.1 Classification 497 P2.2 Planning an investigation 582
 18.2 Biodiversity 507 P2.3 Constructing a hypothesis 582
 18.3 Maintaining biodiversity 521 P2.4 Identifying variables 583
 18.4 Protecting endangered species 524 P2.5 Describing the sequence of steps 586
 18.5 Controlling alien species 530 P2.6 Risk assessment 586
 18.6 International conservation P2.7 Recording and displaying results 587
 organisations 531 P2.8 Analysis, conclusions and evaluation 587
 P2.9 Evaluating evidence 600
19 Genetic technology
 P2.10 Conclusions and discussion 600
 19.1 Genetic engineering 544
 19.2 Tools for the gene technologist 545 Appendix 1: Amino acid R groups 608
 19.3 Gene editing 552
 19.4 Separating and amplifying DNA 555 Appendix 2: DNA and RNA triplet codes 609
 19.5 Analysing and storing genetic
 information 560 Glossary 611
 19.6 Genetic technology and medicine 564 Index 631
 19.7 Genetic technology and agriculture 570
 Acknowledgements 643




vi

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Introduction




 Introduction
This is the fifth edition of the Cambridge International AS & A Level Biology
Coursebook, and it provides everything that you need to support your course for
Cambridge AS & A Level Biology (9700). It provides full coverage of the syllabus for
examinations from 2022 onwards.
The chapters are arranged in the same sequence as the topics in the syllabus.
Chapters 1 to P1 cover the AS material, and Chapters 12 to P2 cover the material
needed for A Level. The various features that you will find in these chapters are
explained on the next two pages.
Many questions will test a deeper understanding of the facts and concepts that you
will learn during your course. It is therefore not enough just to learn words and
diagrams that you can repeat in your examinations; you need to ensure that you really
understand each concept fully. Trying to answer the questions that you will find within
each chapter, and at the end of each chapter, should help you to do this.
Although you will study your biology as a series of different topics, it is very important
to appreciate that all of these topics link up with each other. You need to make links
between different areas of the syllabus to answer some questions. For example, you
might be asked a question that involves bringing together knowledge about protein
synthesis, infectious disease and transport in mammals. In particular, you will find that
certain key concepts come up again and again. These include:
• Cells as units of life
• Biochemical processes
• DNA, the molecule of heredity
• Natural selection
• Organisms in their environment
• Observation and experiment.
As you work through your course, make sure that you keep reflecting on the work that
you did earlier and how it relates to the current topic that you are studying. Some of
the reflection questions at the ends of the chapters suggest particular links that you
could think about. They also ask you to think about how you learn, which may help
you to make the very best use of your time and abilities as your course progresses. You
can also use the self-evaluation checklists at the end of each chapter to decide how well
you have understood each topic in the syllabus, and whether or not you need to do
more work on each one.
Practical skills are an important part of your biology course. You will develop these skills
as you do experiments and other practical work related to the topics you are studying.
Chapters P1 (for AS Level) and P2 (for A Level) explain what these skills are and what
you need to be able to do.




 vii

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


You may like to look at two other books in this series – the Workbook and the
Practical Workbook. The Workbook provides clear guidance on many of the skills
that you need to develop as you work through the course – such as constructing
and analysing graphs, and planning experiments – with exercises for you to try.
The Practical Workbook is full of detailed explanations of how to carry out all the
practicals required in the syllabus, and many others too, that will help you to become
more confident in practical work.
This is an exciting time to be studying biology, with new discoveries and technologies
constantly finding their way into the news. We very much hope that you will enjoy
your biology course, and that this book will help you not only to prepare for your
examinations but also to develop a life-long interest in this subject.




viii

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
How to use this series




 How to use this series
This suite of resources supports students and teachers following the Cambridge
International AS & A Level Biology syllabus (9700). All of the books in the series
work together to help students develop the necessary knowledge and scientific
skills required for this subject. With clear language and style, they are designed for
international learners.




 The coursebook provides comprehensive support
 Biology for the full Cambridge International AS & A
 for Cambridge International AS & A Level Level Biology syllabus (9700). It clearly explains
 COURSEBOOK facts, concepts and practical techniques, and
 Mary Jones, Richard Fosbery, Dennis Taylor & Jennifer Gregory uses real-world examples of scientific principles.
 Two chapters provide full guidance to help
 students develop investigative skills. Questions
 within each chapter help them to develop their
 understanding, while exam-style questions
 provide essential practice.


 Fifth edition Digital Access




The workbook contains over 100
exercises and exam-style questions, Biology
carefully constructed to help learners for Cambridge International AS & A Level
develop the skills that they need as they WORKBOOK

progress through their Biology course. Mary Jones & Matthew Parkin


The exercises also help students develop
understanding of the meaning of various
command words used in questions,
and provide practice in responding
appropriately to these.


 Second edition Digital Access




 ix

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK




 Biology
 for Cambridge International AS & A Level
 This write-in book provides students with a wealth
 PRACTICAL WORKBOOK
 of hands-on practical work, giving them full guidance
 Mary Jones & Matthew Parkin and support that will help them to develop all of
 the essential investigative skills. These skills include
 planning investigations, selecting and handling
 apparatus, creating hypotheses, recording and
 displaying results, and analysing and evaluating data.




 Second edition




The teacher’s resource supports and enhances the questions and practical activities
in the coursebook. This resource includes detailed lesson ideas, as well as answers
and exemplar data for all questions and activities in the coursebook and workbook.
The practical teacher’s guide, included with this resource, provides support for the
practical activities and experiments in the practical workbook.
Teaching notes for each topic area include a suggested teaching plan, ideas for
active learning and formative assessment, links to resources, ideas for lesson starters
and plenaries, differentiation, lists of common misconceptions and suggestions
for homework activities. Answers are included for every
question and exercise in the coursebook, workbook
and practical workbook. Detailed support is provided
for preparing and carrying out for all the investigations
in the practical workbook, including tips for getting
things to work well, and a set of sample results that can
be used if students cannot do the experiment, or fail to Biology
collect results. for Cambridge International
 AS & A Level




 Biology
 for Cambridge International AS & A Level
 DIGITAL TEACHER’S RESOURCE ACCESS CARD




 Digital Teacher’s Resource



 DO NOT Code inside is required to activate your
 DISCARD purchase of the Teacher’s Resource




x

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
How to use this book




 How to use this book
Throughout this book, you will notice lots of different features that will help your
learning. These are explained below.

 LEARNING INTENTIONS KEY WORDS
 These set the scene for each chapter, help with navigation through the Key vocabulary
 coursebook and indicate the important concepts in each topic. is highlighted in
 the text when it is
 first introduced.
 BEFORE YOU START Definitions are then
 given in the margin,
 This contains questions and activities on subject knowledge you will need which explain the
 before starting this chapter. meanings of these
 words and phrases.
 You will also find
 SCIENCE IN CONTEXT definitions of these
 This feature presents real-world examples and applications of the content in words in the Glossary
 a chapter, encouraging you to look further into topics. There are discussion at the back of this
 questions at the end which look at some of the benefits and problems of these book.
 applications.

 COMMAND WORDS
 PRACTICAL ACTIVITY Command words
 This book does not contain detailed instructions for doing particular that appear in the
 experiments, but you will find background information about the practical work syllabus and might
 you need to do in these boxes. There are also two chapters, P1 and P2, which be used in exams are
 provide detailed information about the practical skills you need to develop highlighted in the
 during the course. exam-style questions
 when they are first
 introduced. In the
 margin, you will
Questions find the Cambridge
Appearing throughout the text, questions give you a chance to check that you have International
understood the topic you have just read about. You can find the answers to these definition. You will
questions in the digital version of the Coursebook. also find these
 definitions in the
 Glossary at the
 back of the book
 with some further
 explanation on the
 meaning of these
 words.*
*The information in this section is taken from the Cambridge International syllabus (9700) for examination
from 2022. You should always refer to the appropriate syllabus document for the year of your examination
to confirm the details and for more information. The syllabus document is available on the Cambridge
International website at www.cambridgeinternational.org.




 xi

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK



 WORKED EXAMPLE
 Wherever you need to know how to use a formula to carry out a calculation,
 there are worked examples boxes to show you how to do this.



 REFLECTION IMPORTANT
 These activities ask you to look back on the topics covered in the chapter and Important equations,
 test how well you understand these topics and encourage you to reflect on facts and tips are
 your learning. given in these boxes.



 EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
 Questions at the end of each chapter provide more demanding exam-style questions, some of which may require
 use of knowledge from previous chapters. Some questions are taken from past papers. Where this is the case, they
 include references to the relevant past paper. All other questions are written by the authors. Answers to these
 questions can be found in the digital version of the Coursebook.


 SUMMARY

 There is a summary of key points at the end of each chapter.




 SELF-EVALUATION
 The summary checklists are followed by ‘I can’ statements which match the Learning intentions at the beginning
 of the chapter. You might find it helpful to rate how confident you are for each of these statements when you are
 revising. You should revisit any topics that you rated ‘Needs more work’ or ‘Almost there’.

 See Needs Almost Ready to
 I can
 section more work there move on




 These boxes tell you where information in the book is extension content,
 and is not part of the syllabus.




xii

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
Chapter 1

Cell structure

LEARNING INTENTIONS
In this chapter you will learn how to:
• explain that cells are the basic units of life
• use the units of measurement relevant to microscopy
• recognise the common structures found in cells as seen with a light microscope and outline their
 structures and functions
• compare the key structural features of animal and plant cells
• use a light microscope and make temporary preparations to observe cells
• recognise, draw and measure cell structures from temporary preparations and micrographs
• calculate magnifications of images and actual sizes of specimens using drawings or micrographs
• explain the use of the electron microscope to study cells with reference to the increased resolution of
 electron microscopes
• recognise the common structures found in cells as seen with an electron microscope and outline their
 structures and functions
• outline briefly the role of ATP in cells
• describe the structure of bacteria and compare the structure of prokaryotic cells with eukaryotic cells
• describe the structure of viruses.




 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK



 BEFORE YOU START
 • Make a list of structures that could be found in a cell.
 • Try to write down the functions of the structures you have listed.
 • Which structures are found in plant cells and which are found in animal cells?
 • Are there any cells that are not animal or plant cells?


 THINKING OUTSIDE THE BOX
 Progress in science often depends on people
 thinking ‘outside the box’ – original thinkers who
 are often ignored or even ridiculed when they
 first put forward their radical new ideas. One such
 individual, who battled constantly throughout
 her career to get her ideas accepted, was the
 American biologist Lynn Margulis (1938–2011;
 Figure 1.1). Her greatest achievement was to use
 evidence from microbiology to help firmly establish
 an idea that had been around since the mid-19th
 century – that new organisms can be created from
 combinations of existing organisms. Importantly,
 the existing organisms are not necessarily closely
 related. The organisms form a symbiotic partnership
 (they live together in a partnership in which both
 partners benefit). Margulis imagined that one
 organism engulfed (‘ate’) another. Normally the
 engulfed organism would be digested and killed, Figure 1.1: Lynn Margulis: ‘My work more than didn’t fit
 but sometimes the organism engulfed may survive in. It crossed the boundaries that people had spent their
 and even be of benefit to the organism in which lives building up. It hits some 30 sub-fields of biology,
 it finds itself. This type of symbiosis is known as even geology.’
 endosymbiosis (‘endo’ means inside). A completely
 new type of organism is created, representing a traditional view, first put forward by Charles Darwin,
 dramatic evolutionary change. that evolution occurs mainly as a result of
 competition between species.
 The best-known example of Margulis’ ideas is her
 suggestion that mitochondria and chloroplasts Questions for discussion
 were originally free-living bacteria (prokaryotes). • Can you think of any ideas people have had
 She suggested that these bacteria invaded the which were controversial at the time but
 ancestors of modern eukaryotic cells, which are are now accepted? Try to think of scientific
 much larger and more complex cells than bacteria, examples. You may also like to consider why
 and entered into a symbiotic relationship with the ideas were controversial.
 the cells. This idea has been confirmed as true by
 later work. Margulis saw such symbiotic unions • Can you think of any scientific ideas people
 as a major driving cause of evolutionary change. have now which are controversial and not
 Throughout her life, she continued to challenge the accepted by everybody?




2

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
1 Cell structure


 animals. It was soon also realised that all cells come from
1.1 Cells are the basic pre-existing cells by the process of cell division. This
 raises the obvious question of where the original cell
units of life came from. There are many hypotheses, but we still have
 no definite answers to this question.
Towards the middle of the 19th century, scientists made a
fundamental breakthrough in our understanding of how life
‘works’. They realised that the basic unit of life is the cell. Why cells?
The origins of this idea go back to the early days of A cell can be thought of as a bag in which the chemistry
microscopy when an English scientist, Robert Hooke, of life occurs. The activity going on inside the cell is
decided to examine thin slices of plant material. He therefore separated from the environment outside the cell.
chose cork as one of his examples. Looking down the The bag, or cell, is surrounded by a thin membrane. The
microscope, he made a drawing to show the regular membrane is an essential feature of all cells because it
appearance of the structure, as you can see in Figure 1.2. controls exchange between the cell and its environment.
In 1665 he published a book containing It can act as a barrier, but it can also control movement
this drawing. of materials across the membrane in both directions. The
 membrane is therefore described as partially permeable.
 If it were freely permeable, life could not exist, because
 the chemicals of the cell would simply mix with the
 surrounding chemicals by diffusion and the inside of the
 cell would be the same as the outside.


 Two types of cell
 During the 20th century, scientists studying the cells
 of bacteria and of more complex organisms such as
 plants and animals began to realise that there were
 two fundamentally different kinds of cells. Some cells
 were very simple, but some were much larger and more
 complex. The complex cells contained a nucleus (plural:
 nuclei) surrounded by two membranes. The genetic
 material, DNA, was in the nucleus. In the simple cells
 the DNA was not surrounded by membranes, but
 apparently free in the cytoplasm.

Figure 1.2: Drawing of cork cells published by Robert KEY WORDS
Hooke in 1665.
 cell: the basic unit of all living organisms; it is
 surrounded by a cell surface membrane and
If you examine the drawing you will see the regular
 contains genetic material (DNA) and cytoplasm
structures that Hooke called ‘cells’. Each cell appeared
 containing organelles
to be an empty box surrounded by a wall. Hooke had
discovered and described, without realising it, the organelle: a functionally and structurally distinct
fundamental unit of all living things. part of a cell, e.g. a ribosome or mitochondrion
Although we now know that the cells of cork are dead, nucleus (plural: nuclei): a relatively large
Hooke and other scientists made further observations of organelle found in eukaryotic cells, but absent
cells in living materials. However, it was not until almost from prokaryotic cells; the nucleus contains the
200 years later that a general cell theory emerged from cell’s DNA and therefore controls the activities
the work of two German scientists. In 1838 Schleiden, of the cell; it is surrounded by two membranes
a botanist, suggested that all plants are made of cells. A which together form the nuclear envelope
year later Schwann, a zoologist, suggested the same for




 3

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


Organisms made of cells with membrane-bound are unfamiliar to most people. Before studying light and
nuclei are now known as eukaryotes, while the simpler electron microscopy further, you need to become familiar
cells lacking membrane-bound nuclei are known as with these units.
prokaryotes (‘eu’ means true, ‘karyon’ means nucleus,
 According to international agreement, the International
‘pro’ means before). Eukaryotes are thought to have
 System of Units (SI units) should be used. In this system,
evolved from prokaryotes more than two billion years
 the basic unit of length is the metre (symbol, m). More
ago. Prokaryotes include bacteria. Eukaryotes include
 units are created by going a thousand times larger or
animals, plants, fungi and some other organisms.
 smaller. Standard prefixes are used for the units. For
 example, the prefix ‘kilo’ means 1000 times. Thus,
 KEY WORDS 1 kilometre = 1000 metres. The units of length relevant
 to cell studies are shown in Table 1.1.
 eukaryote: an organism whose cells contain a
 nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles The smallest structure visible with the human eye is
 about 50–100 μm in diameter (roughly the diameter of
 prokaryote: an organism whose cells do not the sharp end of a pin). The cells in your body vary in
 contain a nucleus or any other membrane-bound size from about 5 μm to 40 μm. It is difficult to imagine
 organelles how small these cells are, especially when they are clearly
 visible using a microscope. An average bacterial cell is
 about 1 µm across. One of the smallest structures you
 will study in this book is the ribosome, which is only
1.2 Cell biology and about 25 nm in diameter! You could line up about
 20 000 ribosomes across the full stop at the end of
microscopy this sentence.

The study of cells has given rise to an important branch
of biology known as cell biology. Cell biologists study
cells using many different methods, including the use of
various types of microscope.
 1.3 Plant and animal
There are two fundamentally different types of cells as seen with a light
microscope: the light microscope and the electron
microscope. Both use a form of radiation in order to
see the specimen being examined. The light microscope
 microscope
uses light as a source of radiation, while the electron Microscopes that use light as a source of radiation are
microscope uses electrons, for reasons which are called light microscopes. Figure 1.3 shows how the light
discussed later. microscope works.

 Note: the structure of a light microscope is
Units of measurement extension content, and is not part of the syllabus.
In order to measure objects in the microscopic world,
we need to use very small units of measurement, which


 Fraction of a metre Unit Symbol
 –3
 one thousandth = 0.001 = 1/1000 = 10 millimetre mm
 –6
 one millionth = 0.000 001 = 1/1000 000 = 10 micrometre μm
 one thousand millionth = 0.000 000 001 = nanometre nm
 1/1000 000 000 = 10–9


Table 1.1: Units of measurement relevant to cell studies: 1 micrometre is a thousandth of a millimetre; 1 nanometre is a
thousandth of a micrometre.




4

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
1 Cell structure


 Eyepiece lens magniﬁes and showing the structure of a generalised plant cell, both
 eyepiece
 focuses the image from the as seen with a light microscope. (A generalised cell
 objective onto the eye. shows all the structures that may commonly be found
 in a cell.) Figures 1.6 and 1.7 are photomicrographs.
light beam
 A photomicrograph is a photograph of a specimen as
 seen with a light microscope. Figure 1.6 shows some
 human cells. Figure 1.7 shows a plant cell taken from a
 leaf. Both figures show cells magnified 400 times, which
objective Objective lens collects light is equivalent to using the high-power objective lens on
coverslip passing through the specimen a light microscope. See also Figures 1.8a and 1.8b for
 and produces a magnified image. labelled drawings of these figures.
glass slide
 Many of the cell contents are colourless and transparent
 Condenser lens focuses the so they need to be stained with coloured dyes to be seen.
condenser
 light onto the specimen held The human cells in Figure 1.6 have been stained. The
 between the coverslip and slide. chromatin in the nuclei is particularly heavily stained.
iris diaphragm
 The plant cells in Figure 1.5 have not been stained
light source Condenser iris diaphragm is
 because the chloroplasts contain the green pigment
 closed slightly to produce a
 pathway of light narrow beam of light.
 chlorophyll and are easily visible without staining.

 Figure 1.3: How the light microscope works. The coverslip is
 a thin sheet of glass used to cover the specimen. It protects
 specimens from drying out and also prevents the objective
 Question
 lens from touching the specimen. 1 Using Figures 1.4 and 1.5, name the structures that:
 a animal and plant cells have in common
 small structures that b are found only in plant cells
 Golgi apparatus are difficult to identify c are found only in animal cells.
 cytoplasm

 mitochondria Features that animal and plant
 cells have in common
 Cell surface membrane
 cell surface All cells, including those of both eukaryotes and
 membrane prokaryotes, are surrounded by a very thin cell surface
 membrane. This is also sometimes referred to as the
 plasma membrane. As mentioned before, it is partially
 permeable and controls the exchange of materials
 between the cell and its environment.
 nuclear envelope
 chromatin – Nucleus
 centriole – always deeply staining
 nucleus All eukaryotic cells contain a nucleus. The nucleus
 found near nucleus and thread-like
 is a relatively large structure. It stains intensely and
 nucleolus –
 deeply staining
 KEY WORD
 Figure 1.4: Structure of a generalised animal cell (diameter
 about 20 μm) as seen with a very high quality light cell surface membrane: a very thin membrane
 microscope. (about 7 nm diameter) surrounding all cells; it is
 partially permeable and controls the exchange of
 Figure 1.4 is a drawing showing the structure of a materials between the cell and its environment
 generalised animal cell and Figure 1.5 is a drawing




 5

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


 middle lamella – thin layer
 tonoplast – membrane
 holding cells together
 surrounding vacuole

 cell surface membrane plasmodesma –
 (pressed against cell wall) connects cytoplasm
 of neighbouring cells
 vacuole – large cell wall of
 with central position neighbouring
 cell
 cytoplasm

 cell wall
 mitochondria
 chloroplast

 nucleolus –
 deeply staining grana just visible
 nuclear envelope
 nucleus
 chromatin – small structures that
 deeply staining are diﬃcult to identify
 and thread-like Golgi apparatus


Figure 1.5: Structure of a generalised plant cell (diameter about 40 μm) as seen with a very high quality light microscope.




Figure 1.6: Cells from the lining of the human cheek (×400). Figure 1.7: Cells in a moss leaf (×400). Many green chloroplasts
Each cell shows a centrally placed nucleus, which is typical are visible inside each cell. The grana are just visible as black
of animal cells. The cells are part of a tissue known as grains inside the chloroplasts (‘grana’ means grains). Cell walls
squamous (flattened) epithelium. are also clearly visible (animal cells lack cell walls).




6

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
1 Cell structure


is therefore very easy to see when looking down the
microscope. The deeply staining material in the nucleus KEY WORDS
is called chromatin (‘chroma’ means colour). Chromatin chromatin: the material of which chromosomes
is a mass of coiled threads. The threads are seen to are made, consisting of DNA, proteins and small
collect together to form chromosomes during nuclear amounts of RNA; visible as patches or fibres
division (Chapter 5, Section 5.2, Chromosomes). within the nucleus when stained
Chromatin contains DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the
molecule which contains the instructions (genes) that chromosome: in the nucleus of the cells of
control the activities of the cell (Chapter 6). eukaryotes, a structure made of tightly coiled
 chromatin (DNA, proteins and RNA) visible during
Inside the nucleus an even more deeply staining area cell division; the term ‘circular DNA’ is now also
is visible, the nucleolus. This is made of loops of DNA commonly used for the circular strand of DNA
from several chromosomes. The number of nucleoli is present in a prokaryotic cell
variable, one to five being common in mammals. One of
 nucleolus: a small structure, one or more of
the main functions of nucleoli is to make ribosomes.
 which is found inside the nucleus; the nucleolus
 is usually visible as a densely stained body; its
Cytoplasm function is to manufacture ribosomes using the
All the living material inside the cell is called protoplasm. information in its own DNA
It is also useful to have a term for all the living material
 protoplasm: all the living material inside a cell
outside the nucleus; it is called cytoplasm. Therefore,
 (cytoplasm plus nucleus)
cytoplasm + nucleus = protoplasm.
 cytoplasm: the contents of a cell, excluding
Cytoplasm is an aqueous (watery) material, varying the nucleus
from a fluid to a jelly-like consistency. Using a light
microscope, many small structures can be seen within mitochondrion (plural: mitochondria): the
it. These have been likened to small organs and are organelle in eukaryotes in which aerobic
therefore known as organelles (meaning ‘little organs’). respiration takes place
An organelle can be defined as a functionally and cell wall: a wall surrounding prokaryote, plant
structurally distinct part of a cell. Organelles are often, and fungal cells; the wall contains a strengthening
but not always, surrounded by one or two membranes material which protects the cell from mechanical
so that their activities can be separated from the damage, supports it and prevents it from bursting
surrounding cytoplasm. Organising cell activities in by osmosis if the cell is surrounded by a solution
separate compartments is essential for a structure as with a higher water potential
complex as an animal or plant cell to work efficiently.

Mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion) Differences between
The most numerous organelles seen with the light
microscope are usually mitochondria (singular: animal and plant cells
mitochondrion). Mitochondria are only just visible using One of the structures commonly found in animal cells
a light microscope. Videos of living cells, taken with the which is absent from plant cells is the centriole. Plant
aid of a light microscope, have shown that mitochondria cells also differ from animal cells in possessing cell walls,
can move about, change shape and divide. They are large permanent vacuoles and chloroplasts.
specialised to carry out aerobic respiration.
 Centrioles
Golgi apparatus Under the light microscope the centriole appears as
The use of special stains containing silver resulted in the a small structure close to the nucleus (Figure 1.4).
Golgi apparatus being discovered in 1898 by Camillo Centrioles are discussed later in this chapter.
Golgi. The Golgi apparatus collects and processes
molecules within the cell, particularly proteins.
 Cell walls and plasmodesmata
 With a light microscope, individual plant cells are more
 easily seen than animal cells. This is because they are
 Note: you do not need to learn this structure. It is
 usually larger and, unlike animal cells, are surrounded
 sometimes called the Golgi body or Golgi complex.
 by a cell wall. Note that the cell wall is an extra




 7

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


structure which is outside the cell surface membrane. of the plant, mainly in the leaves. They are relatively
The wall is relatively rigid because it contains fibres large organelles and so are easily seen with a light
of cellulose, a polysaccharide which strengthens the microscope. It is even possible to see tiny ‘grains’ or
wall. The cell wall gives the cell a definite shape. It grana (singular: granum) inside the chloroplasts using
prevents the cell from bursting when water enters by a light microscope (Figure 1.7). These are the parts
osmosis, allowing large pressures to develop inside the of the chloroplast that contain chlorophyll, the green
cell (Chapter 4, Section 4.5, Movement of substances pigment which absorbs light during the process of
across membranes). Cell walls may be reinforced with photosynthesis. Chloroplasts are discussed further in
extra cellulose or with a hard material called lignin Chapter 13 (Section 13.2, Structure and function of
for extra strength (Chapter 7). Cell walls are freely chloroplasts).
permeable, allowing free movement of molecules and
ions through to the cell surface membrane.
 KEY WORDS
Plant cells are linked to neighbouring cells by means
of pores containing fine strands of cytoplasm. plasmodesma (plural: plasmodesmata): a
These structures are called plasmodesmata (singular: pore-like structure found in plant cell walls;
plasmodesma). They are lined with the cell surface plasmodesmata of neighbouring plant cells line
membrane. Movement through the pores is thought to up to form tube-like pores through the cell walls,
be controlled by the structure of the pores. allowing the controlled passage of materials from
 one cell to the other; the pores contain ER and
 are lined with the cell surface membrane
Vacuoles
Vacuoles are sac-like structures which are surrounded vacuole: an organelle found in eukaryotic cells;
by a single membrane. Although animal cells may a large, permanent central vacuole is a typical
possess small vacuoles such as phagocytic vacuoles feature of plant cells, where it has a variety of
(Chapter 4, Section 4.5, Movement of substances functions, including storage of biochemicals such
across membranes), which are temporary structures, as salts, sugars and waste products; temporary
mature plant cells often possess a large, permanent, vacuoles, such as phagocytic vacuoles (also
central vacuole. The plant vacuole is surrounded by known as phagocytic vesicles), may form in
a membrane, the tonoplast, which controls exchange animal cells
between the vacuole and the cytoplasm. The fluid
 tonoplast: the partially permeable membrane
in the vacuole is a solution of pigments, enzymes,
 that surrounds plant vacuoles
sugars and other organic compounds (including some
waste products), mineral salts, oxygen and carbon chloroplast: an organelle, bounded by an
dioxide. envelope (i.e. two membranes), in which
In plants, vacuoles help to regulate the osmotic photosynthesis takes place in eukaryotes
properties of cells (the flow of water inwards and photosynthesis: the production of organic
outwards) as well as having a wide range of other substances from inorganic ones, using energy
functions. For example, the pigments which colour from light
the petals of certain flowers and the parts of some
vegetables, such as the red pigment of beetroots, may grana (singular: granum): stacks of membranes
be found in vacuoles. inside a chloroplast

Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts are organelles specialised for the process
of photosynthesis. They are found in the green parts




8

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
1 Cell structure



IMPORTANT
• You can think of a plant cell as being very similar to an animal cell but with extra structures.
• Plant cells are often larger than animal cells, although cell size varies enormously.
• Do not confuse the cell wall with the cell surface membrane. Cell walls are relatively thick and physically
 strong, whereas cell surface membranes are very thin. Cell walls are freely permeable, whereas cell
 surface membranes are partially permeable. All cells have a cell surface membrane, but animal cells do
 not have a cell wall.
• Vacuoles are not confined to plant cells; animal cells may have small vacuoles, such as phagocytic
 vacuoles, although these are not usually permanent structures.



PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 1.1

Making temporary slides black and will also colour nuclei and cell walls a pale
 yellow. A dilute solution of methylene blue can be
A common method of examining material with a light
 used to stain animal cells such as cheek cells.
microscope is to cut thin slices of the material called
‘sections’. The advantage of cutting sections is that Viewing specimens yourself with a microscope will
they are thin enough to allow light to pass through help you to understand and remember structures.
the section. The section is laid (‘mounted’) on a glass Your understanding can be reinforced by making
slide and covered with a coverslip to protect it. Light a pencil drawing on good quality plain paper.
passing through the section produces an image Remember always to draw what you see, and not
which can then be magnified using the objective and what you think you should see.
eyepiece lenses of the microscope.
 Procedure
Biological material may be examined live or in a
preserved state. Prepared slides contain material that Place the biological specimen on a clean glass slide
has been killed and preserved in a life-like condition. and add one or two drops of stain. Carefully lower a
 cover over the specimen to protect the microscope
Temporary slides are quicker and easier to prepare lens and to help prevent the specimen from drying
and are often used to examine fresh material out. Adding a drop of glycerine and mixing it with
containing living cells. In both cases the sections the stain can also help prevent drying out.
are typically stained before being mounted on the
glass slide. • Suitable animal material: human cheek cells
 obtained by gently scraping the lining of the
Temporary preparations of fresh material are useful cheek with a finger nail
for quick preliminary investigations. Sometimes
 • Suitable plant material: onion epidermal cells,
macerated (chopped up) material can be used,
 lettuce epidermal cells, Chlorella cells, moss
as when examining the structure of wood (xylem).
 slip leaves
A number of temporary stains are commonly used.
For example, iodine in potassium iodide solution (See Practical Investigation 1.1 in the Practical
is useful for plant specimens. It stains starch blue- Workbook for additional information.)




 9

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK



 PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 1.2

 Biological drawing sections of Practical Activity 7.1 before answering
 the question below, which is relevant to this chapter.
 To reinforce your learning, you will find it useful to
 Figures 1.8a and b show examples of good drawing
 make labelled drawings of some of your temporary
 and labelling technique based on Figures 1.6
 and permanent slides, as well as labelled drawings
 and 1.7. Note that it is acceptable to draw only
 of photomicrographs.
 a representative portion of the cell contents of
 Practical Activity 7.1 in Chapter 7 provides general Figure 1.7, but add a label explaining this.
 guidance on biological drawing. Read the relevant
 a
 cytoplasm

 nucleus

 chromatin

 small structures (organelles?)
 visible (not all drawn)




 Question
 2 A student was asked to make a high-power drawing
 of three neighbouring cells from Figure 1.6.
 Figure 1.9 shows the drawing made by the student.
 Using Practical Activity 7.1 to help you, suggest how
 b
 the drawing in Figure 1.9 could be improved.

 eus
 cytoplasm nucl
 representative
 portion of chloroplast
 cytoplasm cytoplasm
 drawn grana visible?

 cell wall




 Figure 1.8: Examples of good drawing technique: a high-power
 drawing of three neighbouring animal cells from Figure 1.6;
 b high-power drawing of two neighbouring plant cells from Figure 1.9: A student’s high-power drawing of
 Figure 1.7. three neighbouring cells from Figure 1.6.

 (See Practical Investigation 1.1 in the Practical Workbook for additional information.)




10

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
1 Cell structure



1.4 Measuring size and Measuring cell size
 Cells and organelles can be measured with a microscope
calculating magnification by means of an eyepiece graticule. This is a transparent
 scale. It usually has 100 divisions (see Figure 1.10a).
Magnification is the number of times larger an image of The eyepiece graticule is placed in the microscope
an object is than the real size of the object. eyepiece so that it can be seen at the same time as
 observed size of the image the object to be measured, as shown in Figure 1.10b.
 magnification =
 actual size Figure 1.10b shows the scale over one of a group of
or six human cheek epithelial cells (like those shown in
 I Figure 1.6). The cell selected lies between 40 and 60 on
 M = the scale. We therefore say it measures 20 eyepiece units
 A
M = magnification in diameter (the difference between 60 and 40). We will
 not know the actual size of the eyepiece units until the
I = observed size of the image (what you can measure
 eyepiece graticule is calibrated.
with a ruler)
A = actual size (the real size – for example, the size of a KEY WORDS
cell before it is magnified).
If you know two of the values M, I and A, you can work magnification: the number of times larger an
out the third one. For example, if the observed size of image of an object is than the real size of the
the image and the magnification are known, you can object; magnification = image size ÷ actual (real)
 I size of the object
work out the actual size A = . If you write the formula
 M eyepiece graticule: small scale that is placed in a
in a triangle as shown below and cover up the value you
want to find, it should be obvious how to do the right microscope eyepiece
calculation.

 I


 M × A




 a cheek cells on a slide b eyepiece graticule c
 on the stage of the scale (arbitrary
 microscope units)


 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100



 0 0.1 0.2


 eyepiece
 graticule in
 the eyepiece
 stage micrometer
 of the
 scale (marked in
 microscope
 0.01 mm and 0.1 mm
 divisions)

Figure 1.10: Microscopical measurement. Three fields of view seen using a high-power (×40) objective lens: a an eyepiece
graticule scale; b superimposed images of human cheek epithelial cells and the eyepiece graticule scale; c superimposed
images of the eyepiece graticule scale and the stage micrometer scale.




 11

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


To calibrate the eyepiece graticule, a miniature a
transparent ruler called a stage micrometer is placed on
the microscope stage and is brought into focus. This
scale may be etched onto a glass slide or printed on a
transparent film. It commonly has subdivisions of 0.1
and 0.01 mm. The images of the stage micrometer and
the eyepiece graticule can then be superimposed (placed
on top of one another) as shown in Figure 1.10c.



Calculating magnification
Figure 1.11 shows micrographs of two sections through
the same plant cell. The difference in appearance of the
two micrographs is explained in the next section.
If we know the actual (real) length of a cell in such a
micrograph, we can calculate its magnification, M, using b
the formula:
 I
M =
 A
 epidermal cell
 cell wall
 KEY WORDS
 chloroplast
 stage micrometer: very small, accurately drawn
 P starch grain
 scale of known dimensions, engraved on a
 microscope slide vacuole
 nucleus
 micrograph: a picture taken with the aid of a
 microscope; a photomicrograph (or light mitochondrion
 micrograph) is taken using a light microscope; cytoplasm
 an electron micrograph is taken using an
 electron microscope
 Figure 1.11: Micrographs of two sections of the same
 plant cells, as seen a with a light microscope, and b with
 an electron microscope. Both are shown at the same
 magnification (about ×750).



WORKED EXAMPLE

 1 In the eyepiece graticule shown in Figure 1.10, The diameter of the cell shown superimposed
 100 units measure 0.25 mm. Hence, the value of on the scale in Figure 1.8b measures 20 eyepiece
 each eyepiece unit is: units and so its actual diameter is:
 0.25
 = 0.0025 mm 20 × 2.5 μm = 50 μm
 100
 This diameter is greater than that of many human
 Or, converting mm to μm: cells because the cell is a flattened epithelial cell.
 0. 25 1000
 2. 5 µm
 100




12

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
1 Cell structure



WORKED EXAMPLE
 2 Suppose we want to know the magnification of the Step 3 Use the equation to calculate the
 plant cell labelled P in Figure 1.11b. The real length magnification.
 of the cell is 80 μm.
 image size, l
 Step 1 Measure the length in mm of the cell in the magnification, M =
 actual size, A
 micrograph using a ruler. You should find
 50 000 µm
 that it is about 50 mm. =
 80 µm
 Step 2 Convert mm to μm. (It is easier if we first = × 625
 convert all measurements to the same
 units – in this case micrometres, μm.) The multiplication sign (×) in front of the number
 625 means ‘times’. We say that the magnification
 So: 1 mm = 1000 µm is ‘times 625’.
 50 mm = 50 × 1000 µm
 = 50 000 µm



Question
3 a Calculate the magnification of the drawing of b Calculate the actual (real) length of the
 the animal cell in Figure 1.4. chloroplast labelled X in Figure 1.34.


WORKED EXAMPLE
 3 Figure 1.12 shows a lymphocyte with a scale Step 1 Measure the scale bar. Here, it is 36 mm.
 bar. We can use this scale bar to calculate the Step 2 Convert mm to μm:
 magnification.
 36 mm = 36 × 1000 μm = 36 000 μm
 Step 3 The scale bar represents 6 µm. This is the
 actual size, A. Use the equation to calculate the
 magnification:
 image size, l
 magnification, M =
 actualsize, A
 36 000µm
 =
 6µm
 = × 6000
 6 µm

 Figure 1.12: A lymphocyte.




 13

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK



Calculating the real size of an separate points. If the two points cannot be resolved,
 they will be seen as one point. In practice, resolution is
object from its magnification the amount of detail that can be seen – the greater the
 resolution, the greater the detail.
To calculate the real or actual size of an object, we can
use the same magnification equation. The maximum resolution of a light microscope is 200 nm.
 The reason for this is explained in the next section, ‘The
 electromagnetic spectrum’. A resolution of 200 nm means
 WORKED EXAMPLE that, if two points or objects are closer together than
 200 nm, they cannot be distinguished as separate.
 4 Figure 1.20 shows parts of three plant cells You might imagine that you could see more detail in
 magnified ×5600. Suppose we want to know the Figure 1.11a by magnifying it (simply making it larger).
 actual length of the labelled chloroplast in this In practice you would be able to see what is already
 electron micrograph. there more easily, but you would not see any more
 detail. The image would just get more and more blurred
 Step 1 Measure the observed length of the
 as magnification increased. The resolution would not
 image of the chloroplast (I), in mm,
 be greater.
 using a ruler. The maximum length is
 25 mm.

 Step 2 Convert mm to μm:
 The electromagnetic spectrum
 25 mm = 25 × 1000 μm = 25 000 μm How is resolution linked with the nature of light? One
 of the properties of light is that it travels in waves. The
 Step 3 Use the equation to calculate the lengths of the waves of visible light vary, ranging from
 actual length: about 400 nm to about 700 nm. The human eye can
 distinguish between these different wavelengths, and
 image size, l
 actual size, A = in the brain the differences are converted to colour
 magnification, M differences. Waves that are 400 nm in length are seen as
 25 000 µm violet. Waves that are 700 nm in length are seen
 =
 5600 as red.
 = 4.5 µm (to one Visible light is a form of electromagnetic radiation.
 decimal place) The range of different wavelengths of electromagnetic
 radiation is called the electromagnetic spectrum. Visible
 light is only one part of this spectrum. Figure 1.13
 shows some of the parts of the electromagnetic
1.5 Electron microscopy spectrum. The longer the waves, the lower their
 frequency. (All the waves travel at the same speed, so
Before studying what cells look like with an electron imagine them passing a post: shorter waves pass at
microscope, you need to understand the difference higher frequency.) In theory, there is no limit to how
between magnification and resolution. short or how long the waves can be. Wavelength changes
 with energy: the greater the energy, the shorter the
 wavelength.
Magnification and resolution
Look again at Figure 1.11. Figure 1.11a is a light KEY WORD
micrograph. Figure 1.11b is an electron micrograph.
Both micrographs are of the same cells and both have resolution: the ability to distinguish between
the same magnification. However, you can see that two objects very close together; the higher the
Figure 1.11b, the electron micrograph, is much clearer. resolution of an image, the greater the detail that
This is because it has greater resolution. Resolution can be seen
can be defined as the ability to distinguish between two




14

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
1 Cell structure



 X-rays infrared
 microwaves
 gamma rays UV radio and TV waves


 5 7 9 11 13
 0.1 nm 10 nm 1000 nm 10 nm 10 nm 10 nm 10 nm 10 nm



 visible light

 400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm
 violet green orange red

Figure 1.13: Diagram of the electromagnetic spectrum. The numbers indicate the wavelengths of the different types of
electromagnetic radiation. Note the waves vary from very short to very long. Visible light is part of the spectrum. The double-
headed arrow labelled UV is ultraviolet light.



 wavelength stained mitochondrion The general rule when viewing specimens is that the
 400 nm of diameter 1000 nm limit of resolution is about one half the wavelength
 interferes with light waves of the radiation used to view the specimen. In other
 words, if an object is any smaller than half the
 wavelength of the radiation used to view it, it cannot
 be seen separately from nearby objects. This means
 that the best resolution that can be obtained using a
 microscope that uses visible light (a light microscope)
 is 200 nm, since the shortest wavelength of visible light
 is 400 nm (violet light). Ribosomes are approximately
 25 nm in diameter and can therefore never be seen
 using a light microscope.
 If an object is transparent, it will allow light waves to
 pass through it and therefore will still not be visible. This
 is why many biological structures have to be stained
 before they can be seen.


 Question
 stained ribosomes of diameter 25 nm 4 Explain why ribosomes are not visible using a light
 do not interfere with light waves microscope.

Figure 1.14: A mitochondrion and some ribosomes in the
path of light waves of 400 nm length. The electron microscope
 So how can we look at things smaller than 200 nm?
Now look at Figure 1.14. It shows a mitochondrion The only solution to this problem is to use radiation
and some very small cell organelles called ribosomes. of a shorter wavelength than visible light. If you study
It also shows some wavy blue lines that represent light Figure 1.13, you will see that ultraviolet light or X-rays
of 400 nm wavelength. This is the shortest visible look like possible candidates. A much better solution,
wavelength. The mitochondrion is large enough to though, is to use electrons. Electrons are negatively
interfere with the light waves. However, the ribosomes charged particles which orbit the nucleus of an atom.
are far too small to have any effect on the light waves. When a metal becomes very hot, some of its electrons




 15

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK


gain so much energy that they escape from their orbits,
similar to a rocket escaping from Earth’s gravity. Free
 Viewing specimens with the
electrons behave like electromagnetic radiation. They
have a very short wavelength: the greater the energy,
 electron microscope
the shorter the wavelength. Electrons are a very suitable Figure 1.16 shows how a TEM works and Figure 1.17
form of radiation for microscopy for two major reasons. shows one in use.
First, their wavelength is extremely short (at least as
short as that of X-rays). Second, unlike X-rays, they are electron gun and anode –
negatively charged, so they can be focused easily using produce a beam of electrons
electromagnets (a magnet can be made to alter the path of
the beam, the equivalent of a glass lens bending light). electron beam
Using an electron microscope, a resolution of 0.5 nm can
 vacuum
be obtained, 400 times better than a light microscope.

 pathway of electrons
Transmission and scanning
 condenser electromagnetic
electron microscopes lens – directs the electron beam
Two types of electron microscope are now in common onto the specimen
use. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) was
the type originally developed. The beam of electrons is
passed through the specimen before being viewed. Only specimen is placed on a
those electrons that are transmitted (pass through the grid
specimen) are seen. This allows us to see thin sections of
specimens, and thus to see inside cells. In the scanning
electron microscope (SEM), the electron beam is used
 objective electromagnetic
to scan the surfaces of structures and only the reflected lens – produces an image
beam is observed.
An example of a scanning electron micrograph is shown
in Figure 1.15. The advantage of this microscope is that
surface structures can be seen. Because much of the projector electromagnetic
specimen is in focus at the same time, a three-dimensional lenses – focus the magniﬁed
appearance is achieved. A disadvantage of the SEM is image onto the screen
that it cannot achieve the same resolution as a TEM.
Using an SEM, resolution is between 3 nm and 20 nm.

 screen or photographic ﬁlm
 or sensor – shows the image
 of the specimen


 Figure 1.16: How a TEM works.


 Note: the structure of an electron microscope is
 extension content, and is not part of the syllabus.
Figure 1.15: Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a
tardigrade. Tardigrades or water bears, are about 0.5 mm It is not possible to see an electron beam, so to make
long, with four pairs of legs. They are common in soil and the image visible the electron beam has to be projected
can survive extreme environmental conditions (×86). onto a fluorescent screen. The areas hit by electrons




16

 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

=== CONCEPT SEARCH CONTEXTS ===

## glycogen — 3 shown
PDF page 32: cell surface membrane lysosome boundary between mitochondria the two cells nucleolus endoplasmic reticulum nucleus glycogen granules microvillus chromatin nuclear envelope ribosomes Figure 1.18: Parts of two representative animal cells as seen with a TEM. The cells are liver cells from a rat (×9600). The nucleus is clearly visible in one of the cells. The boundary between the two cells is difficult to see because the cell surface membranes are so thin. 18 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 33: ribosomes nuclear pore lysosome rough endoplasmic reticulum smooth endoplasmic reticulum cytoplasm mitochondrion Figure 1.19: Ultrastructure of a typical animal cell as seen with an electron microscope. This drawing is based on many micrographs of animal cells. In reality, the endoplasmic reticulum is more extensive than shown here, and free ribosomes may be more extensive. Glycogen granules are sometimes present in the cytoplasm. Question 6 Compare Figure 1.19 with Figure 1.4. Name the structures in an animal cell that can be seen with the electron microscope but not with the light microscope. cell surface ribosome membrane vacuole nuclear envelope tonoplast chromatin nucleolus chloroplast nuclear pore cell wall endoplasmic reticulum mitochondrion starch grain Golgi apparatus Figure 1.20: Representative plant cells as seen with a TEM. The cells are palisade cells from a soya bean leaf. The boundaries between the cells can clearly be seen due to the presence of cell walls (×5600). 19 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 61: here it is above the ring is β-glucose shown as (beta-glucose). Two forms of the same chemical are H C O H H C OH known as isomers, and the extra variety provided by the existence of α- and β-isomers has important biological H C O H H C OH consequences, as you will see in the structures of starch, glycogen and cellulose. H C O H CH2OH H Question 1 The formula for a hexose is C6H12O6 or (CH2O)6. Figure 2.3: Structural formula of glucose. –OH is known as What would be the formula of: a hydroxyl group. There are five in glucose. a a triose? b a pentose? Ring structures Functions of monosaccharides in One important aspect of the structure of pentoses living organisms and hexoses is that the chain of carbon atoms is long Monosaccharides have two major functions. First, enough to close up on itself to form a more stable ring they are commonly used as a source of energy in structure. When glucose forms such a ring, carbon atom respiration. This is due to the large number of carbon– number 1 joins to the oxygen on carbon atom number 5 hydrogen bonds. These bonds can be broken to release OH 6 CH2OH

## non-reducing ends — 0 shown

## companion cells — 3 shown
PDF page 176: CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK CONTINUED • describe the transport of water from the soil to the root xylem through the apoplast and symplast pathways • relate the structure of phloem to its functions • explain that assimilates dissolved in water, such as sucrose and amino acids, move through phloem sieve tubes from sources to sinks • explain mass flow in phloem sieve tubes down a hydrostatic pressure gradient from source to sink • explain how companion cells transfer assimilates to phloem sieve tubes. BEFORE YOU START In Chapter 4 you considered the effect of an increase in size on the surface area : volume ratio of a structure such as a cell. • How does the surface area : volume ratio change with increasing size? • How can the shape of a structure such as a leaf or a cell with microvilli affect the ratio? • Bearing in mind your answers to these questions, try to explain why large multicellular organisms like plants and animals need transport systems. • What features would you expect such transport systems to have (e.g. their structure and how they work)? DOES GOLD GROW ON TREES? Scientists studying how plants transport materials quantities of gold and transport them throughout over large distances have found eucalyptus trees the plant. Gold is toxic to plant cells, but the trees interesting for two reasons. First, eucalyptus get round this problem by depositing the gold in trees can grow to great heights (only redwoods insoluble calcium oxalate crystals in the leaves and are taller). They are commonly over 60 metres bark (Figure 7.2). in height, the tallest living example being 100.5 metres tall. Second, the leaves are concentrated at the top of the tree (Figure 7.1). The leaves have to supply food to the rest of the tree, including the extensive underground root system, and the roots have to supply water to the leaves. This means that any theory of how plants transport food and water has to explain how transport can occur over these very long distances through the tiny tubes of the transport system. Sugar, for example, has to move through tubes no wider than a fine human hair. Not ea
PDF page 194: e of the root hair cell. and the location of phloem in the plant is shown in The large number of very fine root hairs provides a Figures 7.4–7.10, 7.14, 7.19 and 7.22. large surface area in contact with the soil surrounding Phloem tissue is made up of several types of cell. The the root, thus increasing the rate at which water two most important types for transport are sieve tube can be absorbed. Root hairs are also important for elements and companion cells (Figures 7.25 and 7.26). the absorption of mineral ions such as nitrate and magnesium. Sieve tube elements and sieve tubes Phloem contains tubes called sieve tubes that are made 7.5 Transport of from cells called sieve tube elements. Unlike xylem vessels, sieve tubes are made of living cells. Figure 7.25 assimilates Assimilates are the chemical compounds made by the KEY WORDS plant itself as a result of assimilation. Assimilation source: a site in a plant which provides food for in plants is the range of processes by which the plant another part of the plant, the sink converts its inorganic nutrients into organic compounds. An example of assimilation is photosynthesis. During sink: a site in a plant which receives food from photosynthesis, inorganic carbon dioxide and water another part of the plant, the source are converted, using energy, to organic solutes like sieve tube element: a cell found in phloem sugars. Another example of assimilation is the use of tissue, with non-thickened cellulose walls, very nitrates obtained from the soil to help make amino little cytoplasm, no nucleus and end walls acids. Sucrose and amino acids are two of the common perforated to form sieve plates, through which assimilates that are transported over long distances in sap containing sucrose is transported the phloem. c
PDF page 195: membrane cell surface membrane plasmodesmata vacuole cytoplasm tonoplast endoplasmic reticulum nucleus cytoplasm Note Sieve tube elements have no nucleus, tonoplast or ribosomes. Figure 7.25: A phloem sieve tube element and its companion cell. is a diagram showing the structure of a sieve tube microscope. The pores are open, presenting little barrier and its accompanying companion cells. Figure 7.26 to the flow of liquids through them. shows diagrams based on photomicrographs and Each sieve tube element has at least one companion cell photomicrographs of TSs and LSs of phloem tissue. lying close beside it. Companion cells have the structure The LSs show the tube-like nature of sieve tubes. of a typical plant cell, with a cell wall containing Sieve tube elements are elongated in shape. The cells cellulose, a cell surface membrane, cytoplasm, a are joined end to end vertically to form a continuous small vacuole and a nucleus. However, the number of tube. Like a typical plant cell, a sieve tube element has mitochondria and ribosomes is greater than normal, a cell wall containing cellulose, a cell surface membrane and the cells are metabolically very active. and cytoplasm containing endoplasmic reticulum and Companion cells are very closely linked with their mitochondria. However, the amount of cytoplasm is very neighbouring sieve tube elements in terms of their reduced and only forms a thin layer lining the inside of the function. In fact, they are regarded as a single cell wall. There is no nucleus and there are no ribosomes. functional unit. Numerous plasmodesmata pass The most striking feature of sieve tube elements is

## sieve tube elements — 3 shown
PDF page 194: ine root hairs provides a Figures 7.4–7.10, 7.14, 7.19 and 7.22. large surface area in contact with the soil surrounding Phloem tissue is made up of several types of cell. The the root, thus increasing the rate at which water two most important types for transport are sieve tube can be absorbed. Root hairs are also important for elements and companion cells (Figures 7.25 and 7.26). the absorption of mineral ions such as nitrate and magnesium. Sieve tube elements and sieve tubes Phloem contains tubes called sieve tubes that are made 7.5 Transport of from cells called sieve tube elements. Unlike xylem vessels, sieve tubes are made of living cells. Figure 7.25 assimilates Assimilates are the chemical compounds made by the KEY WORDS plant itself as a result of assimilation. Assimilation source: a site in a plant which provides food for in plants is the range of processes by which the plant another part of the plant, the sink converts its inorganic nutrients into organic compounds. An example of assimilation is photosynthesis. During sink: a site in a plant which receives food from photosynthesis, inorganic carbon dioxide and water another part of the plant, the source are converted, using energy, to organic solutes like sieve tube element: a cell found in phloem sugars. Another example of assimilation is the use of tissue, with non-thickened cellulose walls, very nitrates obtained from the soil to help make amino little cytoplasm, no nucleus and end walls acids. Sucrose and amino acids are two of the common perforated to form sieve plates, through which assimilates that are transported over long distances in sap containing sucrose is transported the phloem. companion cell: a cell with an unthickened Assimilates are transported from sources to sinks in cellulose wall and dense cytoplasm that is found phloem.
PDF page 195: rough mitochondrion endoplasmic reticulum cellulose cell wall cell surface membrane cell surface membrane plasmodesmata vacuole cytoplasm tonoplast endoplasmic reticulum nucleus cytoplasm Note Sieve tube elements have no nucleus, tonoplast or ribosomes. Figure 7.25: A phloem sieve tube element and its companion cell. is a diagram showing the structure of a sieve tube microscope. The pores are open, presenting little barrier and its accompanying companion cells. Figure 7.26 to the flow of liquids through them. shows diagrams based on photomicrographs and Each sieve tube element has at least one companion cell photomicrographs of TSs and LSs of phloem tissue. lying close beside it. Companion cells have the structure The LSs show the tube-like nature of sieve tubes. of a typical plant cell, with a cell wall containing Sieve tube elements are elongated in shape. The cells cellulose, a cell surface membrane, cytoplasm, a are joined end to end vertically to form a continuous small vacuole and a nucleus. However, the number of tube. Like a typical plant cell, a sieve tube element has mitochondria and ribosomes is greater than normal, a cell wall containing cellulose, a cell surface membrane and the cells are metabolically very active. and cytoplasm containing endoplasmic reticulum and Companion cells are very closely linked with their mitochondria. However, the amount of cytoplasm is very neighbouring sieve tube elements in terms of their reduced and only forms a thin layer lining the inside of the funct
PDF page 196: sieve plate sieve pore nucleus companion cell dense cytoplasm sieve tube element relatively large lumen with little structure visible thin peripheral layer of cytoplasm (no nucleus) Figure 7.26: Structure of phloem: a diagram in TS; b light micrograph in TS (×300); c diagram in LS; d light micrograph in LS (×200). The red triangles are patches of callose that formed at the sieve plates between the sieve tube elements in response to the damage done as the section was being cut. You can see companion cells, with their denser cytoplasm, lying alongside the sieve tube elements. On the far right are some parenchyma cells. The contents of phloem sieve tubes The liquid inside phloem sieve tubes is called phloem sap, or just sap. Table 7.1 shows the composition of the sap of the castor oil plant, Ricinus communis. 182 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

## glycolysis — 3 shown
PDF page 324: Chapter 12 Energy and respiration LEARNING INTENTIONS In this chapter you will learn how to: • outline the need for energy in living organisms • explain how ATP is suited for the role as the universal energy currency • describe how ATP is synthesised • describe the stages in aerobic respiration – glycolysis, the link reaction, the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation – including the roles of NAD, FAD and coenzyme A • describe the relationship between structure and function of mitochondria • outline lactic acid fermentation and ethanol formation, in anaerobic conditions • explain how rice is adapted to grow with its roots submerged in water • compare the energy values of different respiratory substrates • calculate respiratory quotients • describe how to carry out investigations using respirometers • describe how to carry out investigations using redox indicators. Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 327: ells – can use only glucose as their respiratory substrate. However, other You probably have between 50 g and 200 g of ATP in cells break down fatty acids, glycerol and amino acids your body at this moment, and you will use more than in respiration. Heart muscle, for example, uses fatty 50 kg of ATP today. (That may be similar to your entire acids. body mass.) So, as you can see, your cells need to make ATP constantly. They cannot build up large stores of it, Glucose breakdown can be divided into four stages: but tend to make it as they need it. glycolysis, the link reaction, the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (Figure 12.4). ATP is made when a phosphate group is combined with ADP, in a reverse of the reaction shown in Figure 12.3. This is done in two main ways: KEY WORDS • using energy provided directly by another chemical substrate-linked reaction: in the context of reaction – this is called a substrate-linked reaction ATP formation, the transfer of phosphate from • by chemiosmosis, a process that takes place across a substrate molecule directly to ADP to the inner membranes of mitochondria, using energy produce ATP, using energy provided directly by released by the movement of hydrogen ions down another chemical reaction their concentration gradient. chemiosmosis: the synthesis of ATP using energy In humans, all of the ATP is made in respiration, both released by the movement of hydrogen ions by substrate-linked reactions and by chemiosmosis. down their concentration gradient, across a membrane in a mitochondrion or chloroplast 313 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 328: CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK is a net gain of two ATP molecules per molecule of glucose broken down. glycolysis aerobic pathways A simplified flow diagram of the series of steps in link in mitochondria anaerobic reaction glycolysis is shown in Figure 12.5. pathways glucose (hexose) (6C) to ethanol ATP or lactate Krebs cycle oxidative fructose phosphate (6C) phosphorylation phosphorylation ATP fructose 1,6 bisphosphate 2 molecules of triose phosphate (3C) 2ATP Figure 12.4: The sequence of events in respiration. In glycolysis aerobic respiration, glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm, and the link reaction, the Krebs cycle and oxidative 2NAD phosphorylation take place inside mitochondria. Anaerobic 2H respiration involves other pathways that take place in the

## oxygen is not required — 0 shown

## ATP binds — 0 shown

## myosin head — 3 shown
PDF page 424: 9 shows how this myosin, which is a fibrous protein with a globular head. The fibrous portion helps to anchor the molecule into KEY WORDS the thick filament. Within the thick filament, many myosin molecules all lie together in a bundle with their tropomyosin: a fibrous protein that is part of the globular heads all pointing away from the M line. thin filaments in myofibrils in striated muscle; tropomyosin blocks the attachment site on the The main component of thin filaments, actin, is a thin filament for myosin heads so preventing the globular protein. Many actin molecules are linked formation of cross-bridges together to form a chain. Two of these chains are twisted together to form a thin filament. Also twisted troponin: a calcium-binding protein that is part around the actin chains is a fibrous protein called of the thin filaments in myofibrils in striated tropomyosin. Another protein, troponin, is attached to muscle the actin chain at regular intervals (Figure 15.29). M line 1 When the muscle is relaxed, tropomyosin tropomyosin and troponin are sitting in a position in the actin ﬁlament that actin prevents myosin from binding. troponin 2 When muscle contraction starts, the troponin and tropomyosin change shape to myosin head allow myosin heads to bind to actin. 3 Myosin heads move, 4 ATP hydrolysis causes pulling the actin and the release of myosin causing the muscle to
PDF page 425: n. d Make a model of a sarcomere and use it KEY WORD to explain how the sliding of filaments in a sarcomere leads to the contraction of a sliding filament model: the mechanism of muscle fibre. Use the model you have made to muscle contraction; within each sarcomere the explain the sliding filament model of muscle movement of thin filaments closer together by contraction to someone else. the action of myosin heads in the thick filaments shortens the overall length of each muscle fibre longitudinal section (LS) A B D The energy for the movement comes from ATP molecules that are attached to the myosin heads. Each myosin head is an ATPase. When a muscle contracts, calcium ions are released from stores in the SR and bind to troponin. This stimulates troponin molecules to change shape (Figure 15.29). The troponin and tropomyosin proteins move to a different position on the thin filaments, so exposing parts of the C E F actin molecules, which act as binding sites for myosin. The myosin heads bind with these sites, forming cross- bridges between the two types of filament. transverse section (TS) Next, the myosin heads move, pulling the actin filaments along towards the centre of the sarcomere. The heads then hydrolyse ATP molecules, which provide enough energy to enable the heads to let go of the actin. The heads move back to their previous positions and bind again to the exposed sites on the actin. The thin Figure 15.30: LS and TS of striated muscle fibre. filaments have moved as a result of the previous power stroke, so myosin heads now bind to actin further along the thin filaments closer to the Z disc. The myosin heads move again, pulling the actin filaments even further Stimulating muscle to contract along, then hydrolyse more ATP molecules so that Skeletal muscle contracts when it receives an impulse they can let go again. This continues for as long as the from a neurone. An impulse moves along the axon of a troponin and tropomyosin molecu
PDF page 426: (and shorten) again. The calcium ions bind with troponin molecules that Each skeletal muscle in the body has an antagonist – are part of the thin filaments. This changes the shape a muscle that restores sarcomeres to their original of the troponin molecules, which causes the troponin lengths when it contracts. For example, the triceps is the and tropomyosin to move so exposing the binding sites antagonist of the biceps. for the myosin heads. The myosin heads attach to the binding sites on the thin filaments and form cross-bridges (Figures 15.29 and 15.31). When there is no longer any stimulation from the motor neurone, there are no Question impulses conducted along the T-tubules. Released from 14 Interneuronal synapses are those found between stimulation, the calcium ion channels in the SR close and neurones, such as those in a reflex arc (Figures 15.9 carrier proteins pump calcium ions back into stores in the and 15.21). Describe the similarities and differences SR. As calcium ions leave their binding sites on troponin, between the structure and function of interneuronal tropomyosin moves back to cover the myosin-binding synapses and neuromuscular junctions. sites on the thin filaments. When there are no cross-bridges between thick and thin filaments, the muscle is in a relaxed state. There is Events at the neuromuscular junction Events in muscle fibre 1 An action potential arrives. 7 The depolarisation of the sarcolemma spreads down T-tubules. 2 The action potential causes the diffusion of calcium ions into the neurone. 8 Channel proteins for calcium ions open and calcium ions diffuse out 3 The calcium ions cause vesicles containing of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. ACh to fuse with the presynaptic membrane.

## telomerase — 3 shown
PDF page 138: y, scientists had relegated these aims to impossible dreams. Now, however, humans are once again challenging the idea that the process of ageing is inevitable. Why do organisms grow old and die? Interest in the process of ageing was rekindled with the discovery of telomeres in 1978. Telomeres are protective sequences of nucleotides found at the ends of chromosomes, which become shorter every Figure 5.1: A 19th-century oil painting showing an time a cell divides. A gradual degeneration of the alchemist at work. organism occurs, resulting in ageing. Some cells are able to replenish their telomeres Question for discussion using the enzyme telomerase. It is thought that If the ageing process could be slowed or cancer cells can do this and so remain immortal prevented, this would raise some important moral (will never die). It may therefore be possible to and ethical issues. Try to identify and discuss some prevent the ageing of normal cells by keeping the of these issues. enzyme telomerase active. In Chapter 6 you will learn how DNA can copy itself 5.1 Growth and accurately. In this chapter you will learn how whole cells can do the same. reproduction In Chapter 1 you saw that one of the most easily All living organisms grow and reproduce. Living recognised structures in eukaryotic cells is the nucleus. organisms are made of cells, so this means that cells The importance of the nucleus has been obvious ever must be able to grow and reproduce. Cells reproduce since it was realised that the nucleus always divides by dividing and passing on copies of their genes to before a cell divides. Each of the two daughter cells ‘daughter’ cells. The process must be very precisely therefore contains its own nucleus. This is important controlled so that no vital genetic information is lost. because the nucleus controls the cell’s activities. It does 124 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 147: 5 The mitotic cell cycle The main function of telomeres is to ensure that the adding bases to telomeres is called telomerase. The main ends of the molecule are included in the replication function of telomeres is therefore to prevent the loss and not left out when DNA is replicated. Telomeres of genes during cell division and to allow continued are found at the ends of chromosomes (see Figure 5.11 replication of a cell. and also Figure 5.4). They have been compared with Some cells do not ‘top up’ their telomeres at each the plastic tips on the ends of shoe laces. Telomeres division. These tend to be fully differentiated are made of DNA with short base sequences that are (specialised) cells. With each division, their telomeres get repeated many times (‘multiple repeat sequences’). a little shorter until the vital DNA is no longer protected Telomeres work by making the DNA a bit longer. They and the cell dies. This could be one of the mechanisms have no useful information, but allow the copying of ageing, by which humans grow old and die. This, of enzyme to complete copying all the meaningful DNA. course, suggests that by somehow preventing the loss of As long as extra bases are added to the telomere during telomeres scientists might be able to slow down or even each cell cycle to replace those that are not copied, no prevent the process of ageing (see ‘Why grow old?’ at the vital information will be lost from the non-telomere beginning of the chapter). DNA and the cell will be able to continue dividing successfully. The enzyme that performs the role of
PDF page 150: se cancer. These are The steps involved in the development of cancer are known as malignant tumours. Malignant tumours shown in Figure 5.14. interfere with the normal functioning of the area where they have started to grow. They may block the intestines, lungs or blood vessels. Cells can break off and spread through the blood and lymphatic system Question to other parts of the body to form secondary growths. 9 Research is being carried out into ways of The spread of cancers in this way is called metastasis. It inactivating the enzyme telomerase in cancer cells. is the most dangerous characteristic of cancer because Explain the reason for this. Carcinogens cause mutations. e.g. UV light 2 Cancerous cell 1 Oncogenes does not respond tar in tobacco transformed to signals from smoke by carcinogens. other cells so asbestos continues to divide. X-rays 3 Mitosis 6 Tumour gets bigger. Cells change their 4 Cancerous cells characteristics and not removed by look different under immune system. 5 Rapid mitosis the microscope. absorption of nutrients 7 Tumour supplied 8 Metastasis. Tumour with blood and cells

## spindle checkpoint — 0 shown

## aquaporin — 3 shown
PDF page 374: the collecting ducts. The cells of the collecting duct are the target cells for ADH. ADH acts on the luminal Osmoreceptors, the membranes of the collecting ducts cells, making them more permeable to water than usual (Figure 14.17). hypothalamus and ADH This change in permeability is brought about by Osmoregulation is the control of the water potential increasing the number of the water-permeable channels of body fluids. This regulation is an important part of known as aquaporins in the luminal membranes of the homeostasis and involves the hypothalamus, posterior collecting duct cells. The cells contain ready-made pituitary gland and the kidneys (Figure 14.15). The water potential of the blood is constantly KEY WORDS monitored by specialised sensory neurones in the hypothalamus, known as osmoreceptors. When osmoregulation: the control of the water these cells detect a decrease in the water potential potential of blood and tissue fluid by controlling of the blood below the set point, nerve impulses are the water content and/or the concentration of sent along the neurones to where they terminate in ions, particularly sodium ions the posterior pituitary gland (Figure 14.16). These osmoreceptor: type of receptor that detects impulses stimulate the release of antidiuretic hormone changes in the water potential of blood (ADH), which is a peptide hormone made of nine amino acids. Molecules of ADH enter the blood in 360 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 375: 14 Homeostasis osmoreceptor neurones vesicles that have many aquaporins in their membranes (Figure 14.18). ADH molecules bind to receptor proteins which stimulate the production of cyclic AMP (cAMP), which is a second messenger. Cyclic hypothalamus AMP activates a signalling cascade leading to the phosphorylation of the aquaporin molecules. The activation of the aquaporin molecules causes the vesicles to move towards the luminal membrane and fuse with it, so increasing the permeability of the membrane to water. You can read more about signalling cascades in Chapter 4 (Section 4.4, Cell signalling). The role of anterior posterior cAMP or c-AMP as a second messenger in the control pituitary gland pituitary gland of blood glucose is discussed in Section 14.4, The control of blood glucose. As the fluid flows through the collecting duct,
PDF page 376: 1 lumen of 4 collecting duct water 5 water water urine 1 ADH binds to receptors in the cell surface membrane of the cells 4 The vesicles fuse with the cell surface membrane. lining the collecting duct. 5 Water can now move freely through other aquaporins (not 2 This activates a series of enzyme-controlled reactions, ending with shown) from the cells down the water potential gradient the production of an active phosphorylase enzyme. into the concentrated tissue fluid and blood plasma in the 3 The phosphorylase causes vesicles, surrounded by membrane medulla of the kidney. containing water-permeable channels (aquaporins), to move to the cell surface membrane. Figure 14.18: How ADH increases water reabsorption in the collecting duct. What happens when you have more than enough water in your body – for example, after enjoying a large volume of your favourite drink? When there is an increase in the water potential of the blood, the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus are no longer stimulated and the neurones in the posterior pituitary gland stop secreting ADH. With no stimulus from ADH, the aquaporins are moved out of the cell surface membrane of the collecting duct cells, back into the cytoplasm as part of the vesicles. The collecting duct cells are now impermeable to water. The fluid flows down the collecting duct without losing any water, so a dilute urine collects in the renal pelvis and flows down the ureter to the bladder. Under these conditions, you tend to produce large volumes of dilute urine, losing much of the water you drank, in order to keep the water potential of the blood constant. Collecting duct cells do not respond immediately to the reduction in ADH secretion by the posterior pituitary gland. This is because it takes some time for the ADH already in the blood to be broken down; approximately half of it is destroyed every 15–20 minutes. However, Figur

## succinate dehydrogenase — 2 shown
PDF page 106: [3] e Enzymes are effective because they lower the activation energy of the reactions they catalyse. Explain what is meant by ‘activation energy’. [2] [Total: 10] X A B Rate of reaction 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Temperature / °C 9 The reaction shown occurs during aerobic respiration. The reaction is catalysed by the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase. COOH COOH CH2 succinate dehydrogenase CH CH2 CH COOH COOH succinic acid fumaric acid a Name the substrate in this reaction. [1] b The molecule malonic acid, which is shown below, inhibits the reaction shown. It does not bind permanently to the enzyme. Describe how malonic acid inhibits the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase. [3] COOH CH2 COOH malonic acid 92 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 342: CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL AS & A LEVEL BIOLOGY: COURSEBOOK CONTINUED 3 In aerobic respiration, the Krebs cycle is regarded as a series of small steps. One of these steps is the conversion of succinate to fumarate by an enzyme, succinate dehydrogenase A. a State the role played by dehydrogenase enzymes in the Krebs cycle AND explain briefly the importance of this role in the production of ATP. [3] b An investigation was carried out into the effect of different concentrations of aluminium ions on the activity of succinate dehydrogenase. The enzyme concentration and all other conditions were kept constant. The graph below shows the results of this investigation. 65 Rate of fumarate production / mmol min−1 60 55 COMMAND WORDS 50 State: express in clear terms. 45 Describe: state the points of a topic / give characteristics 40 and main features.

## antivenom — 0 shown

## negative control — 0 shown

## Casparian strip — 3 shown
PDF page 192: oot hairs to xylem. parenchyma xylem cell of cortex vessel passage cell thickened endodermis (not thickened) wall phloem Figure 7.22: Light micrograph of part of a TS of a dicotyledonous root. The endodermis with its thickened walls is shown. Note also the passage cells which allow the passage of water (×250). When the water reaches the endodermis (Figures 7.19 This band is called the Casparian strip and it goes and 7.20), the apoplast pathway is blocked. The right round the cell. It stops water moving through endodermis, like the epidermis, is one cell thick the apoplast. The only way for water coming across (Figure 7.22). It surrounds the vascular tissue in stems the cortex to cross the endodermis is through the and roots. unthickened parts of the wall into the cytoplasm of the endodermis cells. As the endodermis cells get older, the The cells in the endodermis have a thick, waterproof, suberin deposits become more extensive until, except waxy band of suberin in their cell walls (Figure 7.23). 178 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution
PDF page 193: and is not permeable to water. However, just behind the tip you can see many fine hair-like structures. These are the root hairs. They are extensions of some of the epidermal cells of the root. They reach into spaces between the soil apoplast band of suberin, particles, from where they absorb water and mineral ions. pathway the Casparian strip closed a a symplast pathway older cells open b completely suberised cell, passage cell keeps symplast and apoplast symplast pathway pathways both blocked open Figure 7.23: Suberin deposits in the endodermis stop water moving through the apoplast pathway. a In a young root, the suberin forms bands in the cell walls called Casparian strips. The symplast pathway remains open. b In an older root, entire cells become suberised, closing the symplast pathway too. Only passage cells are then permeable to water. b in certain cells called passage cells, no water can enter dilute soil thin, permeable, solution – higher the cells. Passage cells still have a Casparian strip but cellulose cell wall water potential water can continue to pass using the symplast pathway. osmosis – It is thought that this arrangement gives a plant control water over what mineral ions pass into its xylem vessels, as diﬀusing everything has to cross cell surface membranes. down the partially water Once across the endodermis, water continues to
PDF page 646: 208 reasons for maintaining, 521–4 carbonic anhydrase, 84, 85, 207–08 bioinformatics, 562 carcinogens, 134, 136 biological classification, 497–8 cardiac cycle, 211–145 biological drawings, 10, 164–70, 230–1, 304–5 cardiac muscle, 209, 210, 214 biological species, 497 carotene, 334–5 biological washing powders, 81–2 carrier, 441 biosensor, 369–70 carrier proteins, 107–8, 113 biotic factors, 469 cartilage, 226 biuret test, 65 Casparian strip, 178–9 bivalent, 430–36 cat species, extinctions, 520–1 black bear, 348 catalase, 76–83 BLAST, 562 cattle, selective breeding, 480–2 blood, 202–9 cell biology, 4 blood glucose, 349, 364–70 cell cycle, 126–7 measurement, 369–71 cell division, 124–5 blood groups, 268, 283, 437, 465–6 cell membranes, 3, 20 blood pressure, 196, 198–200, 356 bacteria, 33 blood vessels, 195–199 molecules, 101–2 blubber, 56 movement of substances across, 104–15 bobcat, North American, 522 structure, 98–101 Bohr shift, 206–7 cell signalling, 102–4, 364 632 Copyright Material - Review Only - Not for Redistribution

## cholera toxin — 0 shown
