INFORMATICS TARGETED TERM AUDIT


## round robin: 0 hit(s) shown

## time slice: 0 hit(s) shown

## multitasking: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 167: Figure 4.7 summarises some of the functions in a typical operating system. Human computer interface (HCI) Security (manages Multitasking log on, passwords) Interrupt handling Platform for running of routines Operating application software system Memory Management of management user accounts Hardware peripheral Managing files management (including driver
PDF 171: Interrupts Please refer to Section 4.1.4 for a discussion on interrupts. Platform for running of application software Please refer to Section 4.1.3 for a discussion on the running of application software. Multitasking Multitasking allows computers to carry out more than one task (i.e. a process) at a time. Each of the processes will share the hardware resources under the control of the operating system software. To make sure that multitasking operates correctly (in other words, the processes don’t clash with each other), the operating system needs to constantly monitor the status of each of the processes under its control: » resources are allocated to a process for a specific time limit » the process can be interrupted while it is running » the process is given a priority so it can h
PDF 172: 4 Software Spreadsheet Emails Web browser anti-virus OPERATING SYSTEM CPU ▲ Figure 4.10 Multitasking diagram Management of user accounts Computers allow more than one user to log onto the system. It is therefore important that users’ data is stored in separate parts of the memory for security reasons (also refer to security management earlier in this section). Each person logging onto the computer will be given a user account protected by a user name and password. The operating system is given the task of managing these different user accounts. This allows each user to: » customise their screen layout and other settings » use separate folders and files and to manage t
PDF 176: has been idle for a period of time signal from a device or software sent to a microprocessor to temporarily halt buffer the process currently being carried out memory area used to hold data temporarily multitasking 164 318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 164 2/18/21 2:08 PM
PDF 188: 4 Software multitasking – a function that allows a computer to process low-level language (LLL) – a programming language that more than one task/process at a time is dependent on computer hardware, both machine code and assembly language are LLLs administrator – a person responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of a computer system that involves assembly language – a programming language that is multi-user function dependent on computer hardware, a program written in an assembly language program needs to be translated into user account – an agreement that allows an individual to machine code before it is executed u

## context switching: 0 hit(s) shown

## memory allocation: 1 hit(s) shown
PDF 171: » maintaining the directory structures » ensuring access control mechanisms are maintained (for example, access rights to files, password protection, or making files available for editing or locking them) » ensuring memory allocation for a file by reading it from the HDD/SSD and loading it into memory. Interrupts Please refer to Section 4.1.4 for a discussion on interrupts. Platform for running of application software Please refer to Section 4.1.3 for a discussion on the running of application software. Multitasking Multitasking allows computers to carry out more than one task (i.e. a process) at a time. Each of the processes will share the hardware resources under the control of the operating system software. To make sure that multitasking operates

## memory protection: 1 hit(s) shown
PDF 169: Memory management carries out the following functions: » manages the primary storage (RAM) and allows data to be moved between RAM and HDD/SSD during the execution of programs » keeps track of all the memory locations » carries out memory protection to ensure that two competing applications cannot use the same memory locations at the same time. If this wasn’t done the following might happen: – data would probably be lost – applications could produce incorrect results (based on the wrong data being in memory locations) – potential security issues (if data is placed in the wrong location, it might make it accessible to other software, which would be a major security issue) – in extreme cases, the computer could crash.

## memory management: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 140: The most common use of DVD and Blu-ray is the supply of movies or games. The memory capacity of CDs isn’t big enough to store most movies (see earlier comparison notes). 3.3.4 Virtual memory One of the problems associated with memory management is the case when processes run out of RAM. If the amount of available RAM is exceeded due to multiple programs running, it is likely to cause a system crash. This can be solved by utilising the hard disk drive (or SSD) if we need more memory. This is the basis behind virtual memory. Essentially RAM is the physical memory, while virtual memory is RAM + swap space on the hard disk or SSD. To execute a program, data is loaded into memory from HDD (or SSD) whenever required. It is possible to show the differences between using normal memory management and virtual memory management in two simple diagrams.
PDF 141: the competing programs running in memory. Virtual memory gives the illusion of unlimited memory being available. Even though RAM is full, data can be moved in and out of the HDD/SSD to give the illusion that there is still memory available. In computer operating systems, paging is used by memory management to store and retrieve data from HDD/SSD and copy it into RAM. A page is a fixed-length consecutive (or contiguous) block of data utilised in virtual memory systems. 129 318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 129 18/02/21 3:52 PM
PDF 144: swap space large amount of head movement space on HDD or SSD reserved for data used in cloud storage virtual memory management situation where a HDD is so busy doing read/write thrash point operations that execution of a process is halted method of data storage where the data is stored on public cloud hundreds of off-site servers 4 a Give four differences between RAM and ROM chips. b Give an example of the use of each type of memory. 5 a Use the following words to complete the paragraph below which describes
PDF 155: many locations discs network interface card (NIC) – a hardware component dual layering – using two recording layers in storage media (circuit board or chip) that is required to allow a device to such as DVDs and some Blu-rays connect to a network, such as the internet virtual memory – a memory management system that router – a device that enables data packets to be moved makes use of secondary storage and software to enable a between different networks, for example, to join a LAN to computer to compensate for the shortage of actual physical a WAN RAM memory static IP address – an IP address that doesn’t change disk thrashing (HDD) – a problem in a hard disk drive MAC address – a unique identifier which acts as a network (HDD) caused by excessive swapping in and out of data address for a device; it takes the form NN-NN-NN-DD- causing a high rate of head movements during virtual DD-DD, wher
PDF 169: emory at some moment in time), and so on » GUI: the end-user who doesn’t have or doesn’t need to have any great knowledge of how the computer works; a person who uses the computer to run software or play games or stores/manipulates photographs, for example. Memory management Memory management carries out the following functions: » manages the primary storage (RAM) and allows data to be moved between RAM and HDD/SSD during the execution of programs » keeps track of all the memory locations » carries out memory protection to ensure that two competing applications cannot use the same memory locations at the same time. If this wasn’t done the following might happen: – data would probably be lost – applications could produce incorrect results (based on the wrong data being in memory l

## ransomware: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 201: this section: » brute force attacks » data interception » distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks » hacking » malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horse, spyware, adware and ransomware) » phishing » pharming » social engineering. Brute force attacks If a hacker wants to ‘crack’ your password, they can systematically try all the different combinations of letters, numbers and other symbols until eventually they find your password. This is known as a brute force attack and there isn’t a lot of sophistication in the technique. One way to reduce the number of attempts needed to crack a password is to first go through a series of logical steps: 1 Check if the pass
PDF 203: alware is one of the biggest risks to the integrity and security of data on a computer system. There are many forms of malware; this chapter will only consider the following in any detail: Viruses Worms Ransomware Malware Trojan horse Adware Spyware ▲ Figure 5.10 Malware types Viruses Viruses are programs or program code that replicate (copies themselves) with the intention of deleting or corrupting files, or causing a computer to malfunction (for example, by deleting .exe files, filling up the hard drive with ‘useless’ data, and so on). 191 318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_1
PDF 204: this, the damage is done. Once installed on the user’s computer, the Trojan horse will give cyber criminals access to personal information on your computers, such as IP addresses, passwords and other personal data. Spyware (including key logging software) and ransomware are often installed on a user’s computer via Trojan horse malware. 192 318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 192 2/18/21 2:14 PM
PDF 205: » highlight weaknesses in a user’s security defences » be hard to remove – it defeats most anti-malware software since it can be difficult to determine whether or not it is harmful » hijack a browser and create its own default search requests. Ransomware Essentially, ransomware are programs that encrypt data on a user’s computer and ‘hold the data hostage’. The cybercriminal waits until the ransom money is paid and, sometimes, the decryption key is then sent to the user. It has caused considerable damage to some companies and individuals. Imagine a situation where you log on to your computer, only to find the screen is locked and you can’t unlock it until the demands of the cybercriminal have been met. This malware restricts access to the computer and encrypts all the data until a ransom is paid. It can be installed on a user’s computer by way of a Trojan
PDF 206: software) Adware – software that floods a user’s computer with unwanted advertising; usually in the form of pop-ups but can frequently appear in the browser address window redirecting the browser to a fake website which contains the promotional adverts Ransomware – programs that encrypt the data on a user’s computer; a decryption key is sent back to the user once they pay a sum of money (a ransom); they are often sent via a Trojan horse or by social engineering Phishing Phishing occurs when a cybercriminal sends out legitimate-looking emails to users. The emails may contain links or attachments that, when initiated, take the user to a fake website; or they may trick the user into responding with personal data (for example, bank account details or credit/debit card details). The email usually appears to be genuine coming from a known bank or service

## backup: 0 hit(s) shown

## domain name server: 3 hit(s) shown
PDF 195: b pages HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is a language used to display content on browsers. All websites are written in HTML and hosted on a web server that has its own IP address. To retrieve pages from a website your browser needs to know this IP address. The Domain Name Server (DNS) (also known as domain name system) is a system for finding IP addresses for a domain name given in a URL. URLs and domain name servers eliminate the need for a user to memorise IP addresses. The DNS process involves converting a URL (such as www.hoddereducation.co.uk) into an IP address the computer can understand (such as 107.162.140.19). The DNS process involves more than Link one server. For more on IP DNS servers contain a database of URLs with the matching IP addresses. addresses see Figure 5.3 shows how a web page can be located and then sent back to the user’s Section 3.4. compu
PDF 224: perlink – highlighted text or an image that is activated by interconnected computers but not a central server clicking and links to further text, images, a web page or a website timestamp – a digital record of the date and time that a data block is created in blockchain networks domain name server (DNS) – a server that looks up domain names for websites (for example, www.hoddereducation. proof-of-work – the algorithm used in blockchain networks com) in order to find the IP addresses that a computer needs to confirm a transaction and to produce new blocks to add to locate the web servers (for example, 107.162.140.19) to the chain; special users called miners complete and monitor transactions on the network for a reward cookie – a text file sent from a website to a user’s browser; it is used to remember user preferences each time they brute force attack – a ‘trial and error’ method used by visit the website cybercriminals to crack passwords by finding all possible combinations of lette
PDF 400: distributed denial of service (DDoS) full-duplex data transmission 50 internet 180–1 attacks 190–1 functions 321, 324–5 Internet Protocol (IP) addresses 13, DIV 317, 327–8 134 DNS cache poisoning 195 G dynamic and static 135–6 Domain Name Server (DNS) 183 gaming devices 226 interpreters 169, 170 dongles 126 gas sensors 112 interrupt service routine (ISR) 162 dual core systems 81 global variables 325–6 interrupts 161–3, 174 DVDs 126, 127, 128 irrigation systems 224–5 388 318281_INDEX_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_387_390.indd 388 2/18/21 12:15 PM

## DNS: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 147: the re ss download a webpage from a dd IP https://www.hoddereducation.com, https://www.hoddereducation.com the DNS translates the required Domain website URL into an IP address and Name sends it back to the device Device Server https://107.162.140.19 (DNS) de vic eu req ses uir htt ed ps: we //1
PDF 148: Figure 3.71 shows the sequence of events when either a dynamic IP address or static IP address is assigned to a device using the internet. The diagram shows how a device contacts web servers that are also connected to the internet. A DHCP server supplies a dynamic IP address to the device, a DNS server looks up the domain name of the desired website into an IP address and a website server contains the web pages of the desired website. 3.4.4 Routers Routers enable data packets to be routed between different networks, for example, to join a LAN to a WAN. The router takes data transmitted in one format from a network (which is using a particular protocol) and converts the data to a protocol and format understood by another network, thereby allowing them to communicate. A router would typically have an internet cable plugged into it and several cables connecting t
PDF 153: a/instructions by the CPU thereby embedded system – a combination of hardware and increasing CPU performance. More generally, cache means software designed to carry out a specific set of functions any area of storage used to quickly access frequently-used data - other examples include web cache, database cache, barcode – a series of dark and light lines of varying DNS cache thickness used to represent data; the code has to be scanned using laser or LED light source register – a temporary component in the CPU which can be general or specific in its use; it holds data or instructions as key field – the field that uniquely identifies a record in part of the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle a file 141 318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 141 3/26/21 1:16 PM
PDF 195: HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is a language used to display content on browsers. All websites are written in HTML and hosted on a web server that has its own IP address. To retrieve pages from a website your browser needs to know this IP address. The Domain Name Server (DNS) (also known as domain name system) is a system for finding IP addresses for a domain name given in a URL. URLs and domain name servers eliminate the need for a user to memorise IP addresses. The DNS process involves converting a URL (such as www.hoddereducation.co.uk) into an IP address the computer can understand (such as 107.162.140.19). The DNS process involves more than Link one server. For more on IP DNS servers contain a database of URLs with the matching IP addresses. addresses see Figure 5.3 shows how a web page can be located and then sent back to the user’s Section 3.4. computer.
PDF 207: user’s knowledge. Unlike phishing, the user doesn’t actually need to take any See Section 5.1 action for it to be initiated. The creator of the malicious code can gain personal for more on URLs, data, such as bank details, from the user. Often the website appears to come IP addresses and DNS (Domain Name from a trusted source and can lead to fraud and identity theft. Server). Why does pharming pose a threat to data security? As mentioned above, pharming redirects internet users to a fake or malicious website set up by, for example, a hacker; redirection from a legitimate website to the fake website can be done using DNS cache poisoning. Every time a user types in a URL, their browser contacts the DNS server; the IP address of the website will then be sent back to their browser. However, DNS cache poisoning changes the real IP address values to those of the fake website;

## two-factor authentication: 0 hit(s) shown

## authentication: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 146: igned to For more on packet allow the internet to grow in terms of the number of hosts and potential increase routes see in the amount of data traffic. The main advantages of IPv6 compared to IPv4 are: Section 2.1.1. » removes the risk of IP address collisions » has built-in authentication checks » allows for more efficient packet routes. Table 3.13 compares the features of MAC addresses and IP addresses: ▼ Table 3.13 MAC addresses and IP addresses MAC addresses IP addresses identifies the physical address of a device on identifies the global address on the internet the network unique for device on the network may not necessarily be unique dynamic IP addresses are assigned by ISP
PDF 201: total trial and error. Clearly method (2) would still take several hours until the password was found. The longer a password is and the greater the variation of characters used, the harder it will be to crack (also refer to the notes on the use of passwords in authentication). 189 318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 189 2/18/21 2:14 PM
PDF 211: spyware taking over the control of a user’s webcam and microphone which can be used to collect information without the user’s knowledge) » scans for signs that the user’s personal information has been stolen and warns the user if this has happened. Authentication Authentication refers to the ability of a user to prove who they are. There are three common factors used in authentication: » something you know (for example, a password or PIN code) » something you have (for example, a mobile phone or tablet) » something which is unique to you (for example, biometrics). 199 318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 199 2/18/21 2:14 PM
PDF 212: 5 The internet and its uses There are a number of ways authentication can be done. Passwords and user names Passwords are used to restrict access to data or systems. They should be hard to crack and changed frequently to retain any real level of security. Passwords can also take the form of biometrics (for example, on a mobile phone – see later). In addition to protecting access levels to computer systems, passwords are frequently used when accessing the internet. For example: » when accessing email accounts » when carrying out online banking or shopping » accessing social networking sites.
PDF 216: 5 The internet and its uses Two-step verification Two-step verification requires two methods of authentication to verify who a user is. It is used predominantly when a user makes an online purchase using a credit/debit card as payment method. For example, suppose Kate wishes to buy a new camera from a website. She logs into the website using her computer. This requires her to enter a user name and a password, which is step 1 of the authentication process. To improve security, an eight-digit PIN (called a one-time pass code) is sent back to her either in an email or as a text message to her mobile phone (the mobile phone has already been registered by Kate on the website as the second stage

## anti-malware: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 205: the form of pop-ups, or it could appear in the browser’s toolbar and redirect search requests. Although not necessarily harmful, adware can: » highlight weaknesses in a user’s security defences » be hard to remove – it defeats most anti-malware software since it can be difficult to determine whether or not it is harmful » hijack a browser and create its own default search requests. Ransomware Essentially, ransomware are programs that encrypt data on a user’s computer and ‘hold the data hostage’. The cybercriminal waits until the ransom money is paid and, sometimes, the decryption key is then sent to the user. It has caused considerable damage to some companies and individuals. Imagine a situation where you log on to your computer, only to find the screen is locked and you can’t unlock it until the demands o
PDF 211: 4 data owner (this is data only the owner of the data can see). In this type of application, users are allowed to use privacy settings rather than passwords to decide the level of access (for more on this see later in this section). Anti-malware The two most common types of anti-malware are anti-virus and anti-spyware. Link Anti-virus For more on anti-virus Anti-virus has already been described in great detail in Chapter 4. software see Section 4.1. Anti-spyware Anti-spyware software detects and removes spyware programs installed illegally on a user’s computer system. The software is based on one of the following methods: » rules – in this case, the software looks for typical features which are usually associated with spyware thus identifying any potential security issues
PDF 224: ✔ cyber security threats (brute force attacks, data interception, DDoS, hacking and social engineering) ✔ malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horses, spyware, adware and ransomware) ✔ phishing and pharming ✔ ways of alleviating cyber security threats (anti-malware, access levels, authentication, firewalls, proxy servers and SSL) ✔ improving security using automatic software updates, privacy settings and looking for security clues in emails and URL links. Key terms used throughout this chapter persistent cookies – a cookie that is stored on the user’s internet – the world-wide interconnection of networks; the hard drive and only deleted when the expiry date is reached internet makes use of TCP and IP protocols or the cookie is deleted by the user World Wide Web – a massive collection of web pages and is virtual shopping basket – an area of memory in a website based on hypertext transfer protocols (http and https) where items a user wishes to purchase are temporarily
PDF 399: HTML 13–14 analysis 258–9 two’s complement 20–5 colour depth 31 AND operator 318, 359 binder 3D printing 106 Command Line Interfaces (CLIs) 156, AND gate 358 biometrics 97, 201 157 anti-lock braking systems (ABS) 115 BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) 81, comments 329 anti-malware 199 122, 160–1 comparison operators 267 anti-virus software 151 bit depth (sampling resolution) 30 compilers 150, 168–9, 170 application software 148–9 bitmap images 30–1 Complementary Metal Oxide Semi- Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU) 76 bits 32 conductors (CMOS) 95, 161 arithmetic operators 317 blockchains 187–8 computed tomographic (CT) scanners arrays 329 Bluetooth 139 98 one-dimensional (lists) 329–31 Blu-ray discs 127–8 computer architecture 75–80 two-dimensional (tables) 331–2 Boolean data type 304, 343 computer systems 260 artificial intelligence (AI) 241–2 Boolean operators 318 conditional stateme
PDF 402: screensavers 154 surface capacitive screens 99 two-step 204 Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 209–10 symmetric encryption 63–4 virtual memory 128–30 security system clock 77, 80 virus checkers (anti-virus software) access levels 198–9 system software 148 151 anti-malware 199 examples 150 viruses 191–2 authentication 199–204 operating systems 155–60 Visual Basic 300–1 automatic software updates 204–5 utilities 150–5 voice recognition 202 cloud storage 131 volatile memory 121 emails and URL links 205–7 T von Neumann architecture 75–6 firewalls 207–8 tables 331–2 privacy settings 209 see also databases W proxy servers 208 temperature sensors 112, 116, 117 wardriving 190 Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 209–10 test data 281–2 washing machines 87 Transport Layer Security 211 testing 259 weather stations 225

## virus checker: 4 hit(s) shown
PDF 162: puter. Essentially, they are programs computers would be very user-unfriendly SYSTEM SOFTWARE: that help to manage, maintain and control and the majority of users would find it these are programs that allow computer resources. Examples include: almost impossible to work with computers the hardware to run properly • anti-virus (virus checkers) on a day-to-day basis. and allow the user to • anti-spyware For example, operating systems allow: communicate with the • back-up of files • input/output operations computer • disk repair and analysis • users to communicate with the computer • file management and compression (e.g. Windows) Examples include: • security • error handling to take place • screensavers • the loading and running of programs to
PDF 163: 4.1 Types of software and interrupts Utility programs are often initiated by the user, but some, notably virus checkers, often just run in the background without the need for any user input. Utility programs offered by most computer system software include: » virus checkers » defragmentation software » disk contents analysis and repair » file compression and file management » back-up software » security » screensavers. Virus checkers (anti-virus software) Any computer (including mobile phones and tablets) can be subject to a virus attack. Operatin
PDF 166: ▲ Figure 4.6 Time machine message on Mac OS Security software Security software is an over-arching utility that: Link » manages access control and user accounts (using user IDs and passwords) » links into other utility software, such as virus checkers and spyware checkers Refer back to » protects network interfaces (for example, through the use of firewalls) Section 2.3 for » uses encryption and decryption to ensure any intercepted data is meaningless more information without a decryption key on encryption and decryption. » oversees the updating of software (does the update request come from a legitimate source, for example). Screensavers Screensavers are programs that supply moving and still images on the monitor screen after a period of inactivity by the computer. They were originally developed to prote
PDF 402: tation software 151–3 medical applications 238 stock control 89–90 device drivers 154–5 transport applications 233–6 storage 119–20, 123 screensavers 154 ROUND 327–8 cloud storage 130–1 security software 154 routers 47, 136–7 magnetic 123–4 virus checkers 151 run-length encoding (RLE) 36–7 optical media 126–8 solid state drives 124–6 V S string handling 315–16 validation 276–9, 341–2 sampling rate 30 strings 304 variables 302–3 sampling resolution (bit depth) 30 structure diagrams 261–2 local and global 325–6 scanners 96–8 Structured Query Language (SQL) vending machines 86–7 screens 107–9 344–7, 352 verification 55–9, 200, 280 screensavers 154 surface capacitive screens 99 two-step 204 Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 209–10 symmetric encryption 63–4 virtual memory 128–30 security system

## email filtering: 0 hit(s) shown

## bandwidth: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 46: » to save storage space on devices such as the hard disk drive/solid state drive » to reduce the time taken to stream a music or video file » to reduce the time taken to upload, download or transfer a file across a network » the download/upload process uses up network bandwidth – this is the maximum rate of transfer of data across a network, measured in bits per second. This occurs whenever a file is downloaded, for example, from a server. Compressed files contain fewer bits of data than uncompressed files and therefore use less bandwidth, which results in a faster data transfer rate. » reduced file size also reduces costs. For example, when using cloud storage, the cost is based on the size of the files stored. Also an internet service provider (ISP) may charge a user based on the amount of data downloaded. 1.3.4 Lossy and lossless file compression
PDF 52: r example, 4096 × 3192 pixels pixelated (image) – this is the result of zooming into a bitmap image; on zooming out the pixel density can be diminished to such a degree that the actual pixels themselves can be seen pixel density – number of pixels per square inch compression – reduction of the size of a file by removing repeated or redundant pieces of data; this can be lossy or lossless bandwidth – the maximum rate of transfer of data across a network, measured in kilobits per second (kbps) or megabits per second (Mbps) lossy (file compression) – a file compression method in which parts of the original file cannot be recovered during the decompression process for example, JPEG, mp3 lossless (file compression) – a file compression method that allows the original file to be fully restored during the decompression process, for example, run length encoding (RLE) audio compression – a method used to reduce the size of a sound file using perceptual music shaping MP3 – a lossy file compression method used for music files MP4 – a lossy file compression method used for multimedia files JPEG – from Joint Photographic Expert Group; a form of lossy file compression used with image files which relies on the inability of the human eye to distinguish certain colour changes
PDF 147: rectly. This gives s://10 7.162 the device a consistent location and requir .140. ed w 19 also means less bandwidth is used eb pa reducing network traffic (and takes 198.3 ge se Website The device is 1.200 nt to less time to retrieve data) .16 server using a static IP address 198.31.200.16 ▲ Figure 3.71 Comparison of dynamic and static IP addressing 135 318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 135
PDF 150: This all means that modern HD televisions require » they use a widescreen format (16:9 aspect ratio) more data and this data has to be received at a much » the screens use a greater number of pixels faster rate than with older televisions (e.g. 10 gigabits (typically 1920 ×1080) per second). HDMI increases the bandwidth making it » the screens have a faster refresh rate (e.g. 120 Hz possible to supply the necessary data to produce high or 120 frames a second) quality sound and visual effects. 138 318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 138 18/02/21 3:52 PM
PDF 151: between devices. They both use devices which are very close together (< 30 metres electromagnetic radiation as the carrier of data distance) transmission. » when the speed of data transmission is not critical Bluetooth sends and receives radio waves in a band of » for low bandwidth applications (e.g. when sending 79 different frequencies (known as channels). These music files from a mobile phone to a headset). are all centred on a 2.45 GHz frequency. Devices using Wi-Fi is best suited to operating full-scale networks Bluetooth automatically detect and connect to each since it offers much faster data transfer rates, better other; but they don’t interfere with other devices since range and better security than Bluetooth. A Wi-Fi- each communicating pair uses a different channel enabled device (such as a computer or smartphone) (from the 79 options). can access the internet wirelessly at any wireless When a device wants to communicate, it picks one of access point (WAP) or ‘hot spot’ up to 100 metres

## cache: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 87: ure – the Central Processing Unit (CPU)/microprocessor – von Neumann architecture – arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), control unit (CU) and registers – control bus, address bus, data bus – cores, cache and the internal clock – Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle – instruction set for a CPU – embedded systems ★ input and output devices – the following input devices: barcode and QR code scanners, digital cameras, keyboards, microphones, mouse, 2D/3D scanners and touch screens – the following output devices: actuators, light projectors, inkjet and laser printers, LED and LCD screens, speakers and 3D printers – sensors and their use in control and monitoring ★ data storage
PDF 92: Any more instructions No to service? END ▲ Figure 3.3 Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle flowchart 3.1.3 Cores, cache and internal clock We will now consider the factors that determine the performance of a CPU. The first thing to consider is the role of the system clock. The clock defines the clock cycle that synchronises all computer operations. As mentioned earlier, the control bus transmits timing signals ensuring everything is fully synchronised. By increasing clock speed, the processing speed of the computer is also increased (a typical current value is 3.5 GHz – which means 3.5 billion clock cycles a second). Although the speed of the computer may have been increased, it isn’t possible to say that a computer’s overall performance is
PDF 93: time before the next one is due to be executed) – the computer would frequently crash and become unstable ii overclocking can lead to serious overheating of the CPU again leading to unreliable performance. 3 The use of cache memories can also improve CPU performance. Unlike RAM, cache memory is located within the CPU itself, which means it has much faster data access times than RAM. Cache memory stores frequently used instructions and data that need to be accessed faster, which improves CPU performance. When a CPU wishes to read memory, it will first check out the cache and then move on to main memory/RAM if the required data isn’t there. The larger the cache memory size the better the CPU performance. 4 The use of a different number of cores can improve computer performance. One core is made up of an ALU, a control unit and the r
PDF 94: 3 Hardware » a computer’s performance can be changed by altering bus width, clock speed and use of multi-core CPUs » use of cache memories can also speed up a CPU’s performance. Activity 3.1 1 a Name three buses used in the von Neumann architecture. b Describe the function of each named bus. c Describe how bus width and clock speed can affect computer performance. 2 Complete the following paragraph by using terms from this chapter: The CPU ………………… data and instructions required for an application and temporarily stores them in the ……………………. until they can be processed. The ………………………… is used to hold the address of the next instruction to be executed. This address is copied to the …………
PDF 132: Here is a summary of the differences between primary memory and storage devices: Directly addressable by the CPU Primary memory Contains RAM, ROM and cache memory Not directly addressable by the CPU All are non-volatile devices Secondary storage Can be external or internal to the computer Examples include HDD, SSD, DVD, memory stick, Blu-ray disc ▲ Figure 3.58 Summary of primary, secondary and off-line devices 3.3.1 Primary memory Primary memory is the part of the computer memory which can be accessed directly fr

## array bounds: 0 hit(s) shown

## out of range: 2 hit(s) shown
PDF 265: dquarters of a large company, which is housed in a 20-storey building. The robot moves around the corridors picking up the post and delivering the post throughout the building. If a person comes close to the robot, it stops and waits until the person is out of range. a Proximity sensors are used to detect how close to a person the robot is. Describe how the microprocessor (which is built into the robot) would ensure the robot stops when it encounters a person. [4] b The lighting throughout the building is controlled by sensors and a computer. i Describe how the lighting in the corridors and offices are controlled by sensors and the computer. ii Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using an automated system to control the building lights.
PDF 354: re 9.3 Automatic validation for entering DateOfAdmission in the PATIENT table Invalid date However, the WardNumber field validation needs to be set up to allow only automatically rejected values 1 to 10 to be entered. This task needs to be completed by the database developer before the database is used. Out of range ward number rejected ▲ Figure 9.4 Validation rule for entering WardNumber in the PATIENT table Error message 9.1.2 Basic data types There are six basic data types that you need to be able to use in a database: » text/alphanumeric » character » Boolean » integer » real » date/time. 342 318281_C09_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_339_355.indd 342

## session cookie: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 196: ies remember the type of book chosen by the user and the web page will then show a message such as “Customers who bought Hodder IGCSE ICT also bought Hodder IGCSE Computer Science”. There are two types of cookie: » session cookie » persistent (or permanent) cookie. If a cookie doesn’t have an expiry date associated with it, it is always considered to be a session cookie. So what are the basic differences? Session cookies Session cookies are used, for example, when making online purchases. They keep a user’s items in a virtual shopping basket. This type of cookie is stored in temporary memory on the computer, doesn’t actually collect any information from the user’s computer and doesn’t personally identify a user. Hence, session cookies cease to exist on a user’s computer once the browser is close
PDF 197: memory Persistent cookie Web browser closed remains stored; or website session session cookie closed deleted at end of website session Session cookie Persistent cookie deleted from remains stored memory ▲ Figure 5.4 Cookies (first login)
PDF 198: xample.co.ie/sample_page Identify: a the domain name b the domain type c the file name d which protocol is being used. 2 a Give two differences between session cookies and persistent cookies. b Describe three uses of cookies. 3 The following table shows five features of the internet and the World Wide Web. Tick (✓) the appropriate box to indicate which feature refers to the internet and which feature refers to the World Wide Web: Feature Internet World Wide Web it is possible to send and receive emails makes use of http protocols uses URLs to specify the locations of websites and web pages resources c
PDF 224: of letters, numbers and symbols until the user preferences – settings or options stored in cookies password is found that can remember customised web pages or indicate browsing history to target adverts word list – a text file containing a collection of words used in a brute force attack session cookie – a cookie that is stored temporarily on a computer; it is deleted when the browser is closed or the data interception – an attempt to eavesdrop on a wired or website session ends wireless network transmission; cybercriminal often use 212 318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 212 23/02/21 5:20 PM
PDF 226: 5 The internet and its uses Exam-style questions 1 a i What is meant by a cookie?[1] ii Describe the difference between a session cookie and a persistent cookie.[2] iii Give three uses of persistent cookies. [3] 2 A company has several offices. It uses the Internet to transfer data between offices. The company also makes payments to staff and suppliers using online banking. The company are concerned about spyware and other security aspects of using the Internet. a Explain what is meant by spyware and how it is used to obtain data. [3] b The company uses a web page to log on to the online bank. Identify one method

## persistent cookie: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 192: – the purpose and operation of hypertext transfer protocols (HTTP and HTTPS) – the purpose and function of a web browser – how web pages are located, retrieved and displayed – cookies (including session and persistent cookies) ★ digital currency – digital currencies and how they are used – the process of blockchaining and how it is used to track digital currency transactions ★ cyber security – cyber security threats – solutions to keep data safe from security threats. The internet is probably one of the greatest inventions of the twentieth century; it has changed the way the world works and communicates for ever. It is a great source of good, but has also spawned new types of
PDF 196: from the user’s computer and doesn’t personally identify a user. Hence, session cookies cease to exist on a user’s computer once the browser is closed or the website session is terminated. Persistent (permanent) cookies Persistent cookies remember a user’s log in details (so that they can authenticate the user’s browser). They are stored on the hard drive of a user’s computer until the expiry date is reached or the user deletes it. These cookies remain in operation on the user’s computer even after the browser is closed or the website session is terminated. Their advantage is that they remove the need to type in login details every time a certain website is visited. Some websites use cookies to store more personal information or user preferences. However, this can only be done if the user has provided the website with certain personal information an
PDF 197: in temporary user’s hard drive memory Persistent cookie Web browser closed remains stored; or website session session cookie closed deleted at end of website session Session cookie Persistent cookie deleted from
PDF 198: page Identify: a the domain name b the domain type c the file name d which protocol is being used. 2 a Give two differences between session cookies and persistent cookies. b Describe three uses of cookies. 3 The following table shows five features of the internet and the World Wide Web. Tick (✓) the appropriate box to indicate which feature refers to the internet and which feature refers to the World Wide Web: Feature Internet World Wide Web it is possible to send and receive emails makes use of http protocols uses URLs to specify the locations of websites and web pages resources can be accessed by using
PDF 224: rld Wide Web ✔ what is meant by a URL ✔ the purpose of hypertext transfer protocols (http and https) ✔ the purpose and function of a (web) browser ✔ how to locate and retrieve web pages from a website ✔ session and persistent cookies ✔ digital currency and blockchaining ✔ cyber security threats (brute force attacks, data interception, DDoS, hacking and social engineering) ✔ malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horses, spyware, adware and ransomware) ✔ phishing and pharming ✔ ways of alleviating cyber security threats (anti-malware, access levels, authentication, firewalls, proxy servers and SSL) ✔ improving security using automatic software updates, privacy settings and looking for security clues in emails and URL links. Key terms used throughout this chapter

## blockchain: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 192: browser – how web pages are located, retrieved and displayed – cookies (including session and persistent cookies) ★ digital currency – digital currencies and how they are used – the process of blockchaining and how it is used to track digital currency transactions ★ cyber security – cyber security threats – solutions to keep data safe from security threats. The internet is probably one of the greatest inventions of the twentieth century; it has changed the way the world works and communicates for ever. It is a great source of good, but has also spawned new types of crime which can be just as devastating as physical crime. This chapter will investigate many of the features of the internet but, in particular, will
PDF 199: community itself. » Unlike existing digital currencies, cryptocurrency transactions are publicly available and therefore all transactions can be tracked and the amount of money in the system is monitored. » The cryptocurrency system works by being within a blockchain network which means it is much more secure. 5.2.2 Blockchaining Blockchain is a decentralised database. All the transactions of networked members are stored on this database. Essentially, the blockchain consists of a number of interconnected computers but they are not connected to a central server. All transaction data is stored on all computers in the blockchain network. Whenever a new transaction takes place, all the networked computers get a copy of the transaction; therefore it cannot be changed without the consent of all the network members. This effectively rem
PDF 200: 5 The internet and its uses How blockchain works Whenever a new transaction takes place, a new block is created: Data – for example, name of sender and recipient, amount of money, and so on Hash value – a unique value generated by an algorithm (usually a cryptographic algorithm called SHA 256), which acts as a fingerprint Previous hash value – this points back to a previous block in the chain ▲ Figure
PDF 201: 5.3 Cyber security Activity 5.2 1 a A blockchain has seven blocks. Draw a diagram to show how they are all connected to form a blockchain network. b Describe what would happen if block 4 was hacked to change the sum of money in the transaction. 2 What are the main differences between digital currency and cryptocurrency? 5.3 Cyber security 5.3.1 Cyber security threats Keeping data safe is extremely important for many reasons. It may be personal data that you want to keep within your family or close friends, or it may be commercial data, such as passwords and bank details.
PDF 224: ✔ the purpose of hypertext transfer protocols (http and https) ✔ the purpose and function of a (web) browser ✔ how to locate and retrieve web pages from a website ✔ session and persistent cookies ✔ digital currency and blockchaining ✔ cyber security threats (brute force attacks, data interception, DDoS, hacking and social engineering) ✔ malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horses, spyware, adware and ransomware) ✔ phishing and pharming ✔ ways of alleviating cyber security threats (anti-malware, access levels, authentication, firewalls, proxy servers and SSL) ✔ improving security using automatic software updates, privacy settings and looking for security clues in emails and URL links. Key terms used throughout this chapter persistent cookies – a cookie that is stored on the user’s inte

## hash: 3 hit(s) shown
PDF 200: How blockchain works Whenever a new transaction takes place, a new block is created: Data – for example, name of sender and recipient, amount of money, and so on Hash value – a unique value generated by an algorithm (usually a cryptographic algorithm called SHA 256), which acts as a fingerprint Previous hash value – this points back to a previous block in the chain ▲ Figure 5.8 Block description A new hash value is created each time a new block is created. This hash value is unique to each block and includes a timestamp, which identifies when an event actually takes place. We will now consider what happens when a chain of blocks
PDF 341: – functions » be fully commented using your programming language’s commenting feature. ▼ Table 8.26 Programming languages commenting features Example comments Language #Python uses hash to start a comment for every line Python ‘Visual Basic uses a single quote to start a comment for Visual Basic ‘ every line // Java uses a double slash to start a single line comment Java and /* to start multiple line comments and to end them */ Activity 8.21 Check your last two programs and make sure they could be maintained by another programmer. Swap your program listing with another student and check that they can understand it.
PDF 358: should be Allows integer or decimal decimal numbers. values. Date/time '22/11/2022' Date/time field values should Date/time field values must be in enclosed in single be in enclosed in hashes quotation marks. (#). Conditions also require operators to compare values from fields. Operator Description = equal to > greater than < less than >= greater than or equal to <= less than equal to <> not equal to BETWEEN between a range of two values LIKE search for a pattern

## integrated development environment: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 5: 3.4 Network hardware 133 4 Software 147 4.1 Types of software and interrupts 147 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) 165 5 The internet and its uses 180 5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW) 180 5.2 Digital currency 186 5.3 Cyber security 189 6 Automated and emerging technologies 217 6.1 Automated systems 217 6.2 Robotics 230 6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI) 241 iii 318281_FM_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_i_x.indd 3
PDF 159: – assembly language is a low-level language that uses mnemonics and assemblers – the operation of compilers and interpreters for high-level languages – advantages and disadvantages of compilers and interpreters – the role and functions of integrated development environment (IDEs) when writing code. In this chapter you will learn about some of the key software used in computer systems. The chapter will consider essential software (such as an operating system) all the way through to application software (such as word processors). The first part of the chapter will cover how the software is used, while the second part will cover how software is translated so that a computer can carry out the software’s instructions. 4.1 Types of software and interrupts 4.1.1 System software and application software
PDF 177: 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) People use many different languages to communicate with each other. In order for two people to understand each other they need to speak the same language or another person, an interpreter, is needed to translate from one language to the other language. Programmers use many different programming languages to communicate with computers. Computers only ‘understand’ their own language, called machine code. A program needs to
PDF 179: 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) 1 12 0001 00010010 4 13 0100 00010011 0 1A 0000 00011010 Hexadecimal Binary As you can see, this is not easy to understand in binary! Machine code is usually shown in hexadecimal. Find out more
PDF 181: 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) becomes the following machine code instructions when translated: 0001 00010010 0100 00010011 0000 00011010 Interpreters An interpreter is a computer program that reads a statement from a program written in a high-level language, translates it, performs the action specified and then does the same with the next statement and so on. If there is an error in the statement then execution ceases and an error message is output, sometimes with a suggested correction.

## IDE: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 2: The Cambridge IGCSE™ and O Level Computer Science series consists of a Student’s Book, Boost eBook, two Workbooks and Teacher’s Guide with Boost Subscription. Cambridge Cambridge Cambridge Cambridge Cambridge IGCSE™ and O IGCSE™ and O IGCSE™ and O IGCSE™ and O IGCSE™ and O Level Computer Level Computer Level Computer Level Computer Level Computer Science Second Science Second Science Computer Science Science Teacher’s Edition Edition Boost Systems Algorithms, Guide with Boost 9781398318281 eBook Workbook Programming and Subscription 9781398320765 9781398318496 Logic Workbook 9781398318502 9781398318472 To explore the entire series, visit www.hoddereducation.com/cambridge-igcse-computerscience Cambridge IGCSE™ and O Level Computer Science Teacher’s Guide with Boost Subscription Created with teachers and students in schools across the glob
PDF 5: 4 Network hardware 133 4 Software 147 4.1 Types of software and interrupts 147 4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs) 165 5 The internet and its uses 180 5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW) 180 5.2 Digital currency 186 5.3 Cyber security 189 6 Automated and emerging technologies 217 6.1 Automated systems 217 6.2 Robotics 230 6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI) 241 iii 318281_FM_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_i_x.indd 3
PDF 6: 7.4 Standard methods of solution 272 7.5 Validation and verification 276 7.6 Test data 281 7.7 Trace tables to document dry runs of algorithms 282 7.8 Identifying errors in algorithms 285 7.9 Writing and amending algorithms 288 8 Programming 299 8.1 Programming concepts 302 8.2 Arrays 329 8.3 File handling 333 9 Databases 339 9.1 Databases 339 10 Boolean logic 356 10.1 Standard logic gate symbols
PDF 7: Introduction Introduction Aims This book has been written for students of Cambridge IGCSETM Computer Science (0478/0984) and Cambridge O Level Computer Science (2210) for examination from 2023. It fully covers the syllabus content, provides guidance to support you throughout the course and helps you to prepare for examination. This book will help students to develop a range of skills, including programming, problem solving and testing and evaluation, as well as introducing them to automated and emerging technologies. Assessment The information in this section is taken from the Cambridge IGCSE and O Level Computer Science syllabuses (0478/0984/2210) for examination from 2023. You should always refer to the appropriate syllabus document for the year of examination to confirm the details and for more information. The syllabus document is available
PDF 8: – the main characteristics of AI – the basic operation and components of AI systems to simulate intelligent behaviour. Chapter introduction A short introduction to the chapter topics and their focus. This chapter considers the hardware found in many computer systems. The hardware that makes up the computer itself and the various input and output devices will all be covered. Activity Short questions and exercises to help recap and confirm knowledge and understanding of the concepts covered. Activity 1.2 Convert the following denary numbers into binary (using both methods): a 41 d 100 g 144 j 255 m 4095 b 67 e 111 h 189 k 33000 n 16400 c 86 f 127 i 200 l 889 o 62307

## automatic repeat request: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 57: – error checking methods following data transmission: – parity checks – checksum – echo check – use of check digits to detect data entry errors – use of automatic repeat requests (ARQs) to detect errors ★ encryption – the need for and the purpose of encryption – symmetric and asymmetric encryption – use of public and private keys. Data is frequently transferred from one device to another. The two devices could be in the same building or thousands of kilometres away. Irrespective of the distance travelled, the transmission of data needs to be considered with respect to: l how the data is transmitted l how can errors following transmission be detected and can the data
PDF 74: 978151045759 2 Find the check digits for the following numbers using both modulo-11 and ISBN 13 methods: i 213111000428 ii 9 0 9 8 1 2 1 2 3 5 4 4 2.2.4 Automatic Repeat Requests (ARQs) We have already considered parity checks and echo checks as methods to verify that data has arrived at its destination unchanged. An Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ) is a third way used to check data following data transmission. This method can best be summarised as follows: » ARQ uses positive and negative acknowledgements (messages sent to the receiver indicating that data has/has not been received correctly) and timeout (this is the time interval allowed to elapse before an acknowledgement is received) » the receiving device receives an error detection code as par
PDF 78: parity bit B checksum E check digit C cyclic redundancy check g Which of the following is a form of error detection that makes use of a system of acknowledgements and timeouts? A automatic repeat request D parity bit B echo check E cyclic redundancy check C check digit h Which of the following methods uses an extra bit added to a byte to ensure it contains an even number of 1s or odd number of 1s? A cyclic redundancy check D check digit B parity check E echo check C checksum i Which of the following uses a calculated value which is sent after a block of data; the receiving computer also calculates the value from the block of data
PDF 79: j Which of the following describes the check where the receiving computer sends back a copy of the data to the sending computer to allow it to compare the data? A echo check D parity check B automatic repeat request E check digit C checksum Extension For those students considering the study of this subject at A Level, the following section gives some insight into further study on encryption. Quantum cryptography exploits the laws of quantum mechanics to improve on the security of data. Quantum cryptography is based on the use of particles of light called photons (with energy calculated according to the formula: E = hf) and their physical quantum properties to produce a virtually unbreakable encryption system. This helps protect the security of data being transmitt
PDF 80: ✔ the universal serial bus (USB) ✔ how errors during transmission can occur and how to recognise them and recover from them (using parity check, checksum and echo check) ✔ the use of check digits to identify errors following data entry ✔ how automatic repeat requests are used to find errors in transmitted data ✔ why encryption of data is used ✔ symmetric and asymmetric encryption ✔ the use of public keys and private keys in asymmetric encryption. 68 318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 68 18/02/21 3:48 PM

## ARQ: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 57: – error checking methods following data transmission: – parity checks – checksum – echo check – use of check digits to detect data entry errors – use of automatic repeat requests (ARQs) to detect errors ★ encryption – the need for and the purpose of encryption – symmetric and asymmetric encryption – use of public and private keys. Data is frequently transferred from one device to another. The two devices could be in the same building or thousands of kilometres away. Irrespective of the distance travelled, the transmission of data needs to be considered with respect to: l how the data is transmitted l how can errors following transmission be detected and can the data
PDF 74: 978151045759 2 Find the check digits for the following numbers using both modulo-11 and ISBN 13 methods: i 213111000428 ii 9 0 9 8 1 2 1 2 3 5 4 4 2.2.4 Automatic Repeat Requests (ARQs) We have already considered parity checks and echo checks as methods to verify that data has arrived at its destination unchanged. An Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ) is a third way used to check data following data transmission. This method can best be summarised as follows: » ARQ uses positive and negative acknowledgements (messages sent to the receiver indicating that data has/has not been received correctly) and timeout (this is the time interval allowed to elapse before an acknowledgement is received) » the receiving device receives an error detection code as part of t
PDF 82: 2 Data transmission automatic repeat request (ARQ) – a method of checking transmitted data for errors; it makes use of acknowledgement and timeout to automatically request re-sending of data if the time interval before positive acknowledgement is too long acknowledgement – a message sent to the receiver indicating that data has been received correctly (used in the ARQ error detection method) timeout – the time interval allowed to elapse before an acknowledgement is received (in the ARQ error detection method) echo check – a method used to check if data has been transferred correctly; data is sent to a receiver and then immediately sent back to the sender; the sender then c
PDF 83: 1 A company owns a number of vending machines. Data is sent from each of these machines at the end of the day. The data contains amount of money taken, products sold and any error conditions/reports. a The company uses both echo checking and automatic repeat requests (ARQs). i Describe how echo checks work. Explain whether this is a suitable error checking method in this application. [2] ii Describe how automatic repeat request (ARQ) works. [3] b Checksum and check digit are two terms often confused by students. Describe three differences of the two techniques. [3] 2 Explain each of the following computer terms: i packet switching ii cyclic redundancy check iii data skewing
PDF 85: lex a method of error detection; it is based on counting the number of 1-bits; uses an additional checksum bit which is the most significant bit in the byte ARQ a data transmission method where data can be sent in both directions at the same time full-duplex (simultaneously) check digit a data transmission method where data is sent one bit at a time over a single channel/wire universal serial bus a data error occurring when data arrives at the destination out

## lossless compression: 2 hit(s) shown
PDF 14: and colour depth on images ★ data storage and compression – how data storage is measured – calculating the file size of an image and sound file – the purpose of and need for data compression – lossy and lossless compression. This chapter considers the three key number systems used in computer science, namely binary, denary and hexadecimal. It also discusses how these number systems are used to measure the size of computer memories and storage devices, together with how sound and images can be represented digitally. 1.1 Number systems 1.1.1 Binary represents data As you progress through this book you will begin to realise how complex computer systems really are. By the time you reach Chapter 10 you should have a better understanding of the fundamentals be
PDF 48: 1 Data representation Lossless file compression is designed so that none of the original detail from the file is lost. Run-length encoding (RLE) can be used for lossless compression of a number of different file formats: » it is a form of lossless/reversible file compression » it reduces the size of a string of adjacent, identical data (e.g. repeated colours in an image) » a repeating string is encoded into two values: – the first value represents the number of identical data items (e.g. characters) in the run – the second value represents the code of the data item (such as ASCII code if it is a keyboard character) » RLE is only effective where there is a long run of repeated units/bits.

## two’s complement: 5 hit(s) shown
PDF 14: cimal – how and why hexadecimal is used for data representation – how to add two positive 8-bit numbers – overflow when performing binary addition – logical binary shifts on positive 8-bit integers – two’s complement notation to represent positive and negative binary numbers ★ text, sound and images – how and why a computer represents text – the use of character sets including ASCII and Unicode – how and why a computer represents sound – sound sample rate and sample resolution – how and why a computer represents an image – the effects of the resolution and colour depth on images ★ data storage and compression – how data storage is measured – calculating the file size of an image and sound file
PDF 32: c Shift the result in part b three places to the right. d Convert 75 to an 8-bit binary number. e Add the two binary numbers from parts c and d. f Shift your result from part e one place to the left. 1.1.6 Two’s complement (binary numbers) Up until now, we have assumed all binary numbers are positive integers. To allow the possibility of representing negative integers we make use of two’s complement. In this section we will again assume 8-bit registers are being used. Only one minor change to the binary headings needs to be introduced here: –128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1 20 318281_C01_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_001_044.indd 20 18/02/21 3:22 PM
PDF 33: 1.1 Number systems In two’s complement the left-most bit is changed to a negative value. For instance, for an 8-bit number, the value 128 is now changed to −128, but all the other headings remain the same. This means the new range of possible numbers is: −128 (10000000) to +127 (01111111). It is important to realise when applying two’s complement to a binary number that the left-most bit always determines the sign of the binary number. A 1-value in the left-most bit indicates a negative number and a 0-value in the left- most bit indicates a positive number (for example, 00110011 represents 51 and 11001111 represents −49).
PDF 34: 1 Data representation Converting positive binary numbers in the two’s complement format to positive denary numbers Example 3 Convert 01101110 in two’s complement binary into denary: −128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 As in Section 1.1.2, each time a 1 appears in a column, the column value is added to the total. For example, the binary number (01101110) above has the following denary value: 64 + 32 + 8 + 4 +2 = 110. Example 4 Convert 00111111 in two’s complement binary into denary:
PDF 35: 1.1 Number systems Writing negative binary numbers in two’s complement format and converting to denary Example 1 The following three examples show how we can write negative binary numbers in the two’s complement format: −128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 By following our normal rules, each time a 1 appears in a column, the column value is added to the total. So, we can see that in denary this is: −128 + 16 + 2 + 1 = −109. −128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1

## two's complement: 0 hit(s) shown
